The Elephant Vanishes 



STORIES 



HARUKI MURAKAMI 



Acclaimfor HARUKI MURAKAM'S 
THE ELEPHANT VANISHES 



"Charming, humor o us and frequently puzzling ... The Elephant Vanishes [is] funto read. " 

— The New York Times 

"These stories show us Japan as it's experienced from the inside.... [They] take place in parallel 
worlds not so much remote from ordinary life as hidden within its surfaces. . .. Even in the slipperiest 
of Mr. Murakami's stories, pinpoints of detail flash out ... warm with life, hopelessly — and 
wonderfully — unstable." 

— The New York Times Book Review 

"A stunning writer at work in an era of international literature." 

— Newsday 

"Murakami is one of the great Japanese masters, and his style is sexy, funny, mysterious, and always 
coolly deadpan." 

— Details 

"Enchanting . . . intriguing ... all of these tales have a wonderfully surreal quality and a hip, witty 
tone. Mr. Murakami has pulled off a tricky feat, writing stories about people who are bored but never 
boring. He left me lying awake at night, hungry for more." 

— Wall Street Journal 

"What's unique to Murakami's stories is that they manage to kindle up all sorts of feelings at once. ... 
Reading The Elephant Vanishes leaves you wanting more." 

— Philadelphia Inquirer 

"The Elephant Vanishes, through [its] bold originality and charming surrealism, should win the 
author new readers in this country." 

— Detroit Free Press 



T H E 

ele p H A N T 

V A N ISHEs 



S T O R I e S B Y 



HARUKI M U R A K AM I 



TRANSLATED F fl O U T M G JAPAPjESE 
S V A t F « E & B ■ R N B A U M AND 
J A v n u H i N 



U I f* T A G G IWTER. MATlONAL 
V I N T A (3 E B O O K S 
A Q I V ( 6 I O N OF R A N & O Ju « Q U S £ . I N C - 

N ■ W V O R K 



CONTENTS 



THE WIND-UP BI RP AND TL'ESUAVS WOMEN 
THE SECOND BAKERY ATTACK 
THE KANGAROO COMMUNIOUE 

ON SEEING THE 100% PERFECT GIRL ONE BEAUTIFUL APRIL MORNING 
SLEEP 

THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. THE 1881 INDIAN UPR1SING, HITLER'S IN VASION OF POLAND, AND THE REALM OF RAGING WINDS 

LEDERHOSEN 

BARN BURNING 

THE LITTLE GREEN MONSTER 

FAMILY AFFAIR 

A WINDOW 

TV PEOPLE 

A SLOW BOAT TO CHINA 

THE PANCING DWARF 

THE LAST LAWN OF THE AFTERNOON 

THE SILENCE 

THE ELEPHANT VANISHES 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
OTHER BOOKS BY THIS AUTHOR 
ALSO BY HARUKI MURAKAMI 



N D - U P B I R D 

A N D 

T U ES DA v s 

w o m E N 



Iminthekitchen cooking spaghetti when the woman calls. Another moment until the spaghetti is done; there 
I am, whistling the prelude to Rossini's La Gazza Ladra along with the FM radio. Perfect spaghetti - 
cooking music. 

I hear the telephone ring but tell myself, Ignore it. Let the spaghetti finish cooking. It's almost done, 
and besides, Claudio Abbado and the London Symphony Orchestra are coming to a crescendo. Still, 
on second thought, I figure I might as well turn down the flame and head into the living room, cooking 
chopsticks in hand, to pick up the receiver. It might be a friend, it occurs to me, possibly with word of 
a new job. 

"I want ten minutes of your time," comes a woman' s voice out of the blue. 

"Excuse me?" I blurt back in surprise. "How's that again?" 

"I said, just ten minutes of your time, that' s all I want," the woman repeats. 

I have absolutely no recollection of ever hearing this woman's voice before. And I pride myself on 
a near-perfect ear for voices, so F m sure there's no mistake. This is the voice of a woman I don't 
know. A soft, low, nondescript voice. 

"Pardon me, but what number might you have been calling?" I put on my most polite language. 

"What difference does that make? All I want is ten minutes of your time. Ten minutes to come to an 
understanding." She cinches the matter quick and neat. 

"Come to an understanding?" 

"Of our feelings," says the woman succinctly. 

I crane my neck back through the door I've left open to peer into the kitchen. A plume of white 
steam rising cheerfully from the spaghetti pot, and Abbado is still conducting his Gazza. 

"If you don't mind, I've got spaghetti on right now. It's almost done, and it'll be ruined if I talk with 
you for ten minutes. So Fm going to hang up, all right?" 

"Spaghetti?" the woman sputters in disbelief. "It's only ten-thirty in the morning. What are you 
doing cooking spaghetti at ten-thirty in the morning? Kind of strange, don't you think?" 

"Strange or not, what's it to you?" I say. 'T hardly had any breakfast, so I was getting hungry right 
about now. And as long as I do the cooking, when and what I eat is my own business, is it not?" 

"Well, whatever you say. Hang up, then," says the woman in a slow, sappy trickle of a voice. A 
peculiar voice. The slightest emotional shift and her tone switches to another frequency. "F 11 call 
back later." 

"Now, wait just one minute," I stammer. "If you' re selling something, you can forget right now 
about calling back. Fm unemployed at present and can't afford to buy anything." 

'T know that, so don't give it another thought," says the woman. 

"You know that? You know what?" 

"That you' re unemployed, of course. That much I knew. So cook your spaghetti and let's get on 
with it, okay?" 

"Hey, who the — " I launch forth, when suddenly the phone goes dead. Cut me off. Too abruptly to 
have set down the receiver; she must have pressed the button with her fmger. 

Fm left hanging. I stare blankly at the receiver in my hand and only then remember the spaghetti. I 
put down the receiver and return to the kitchen. Turn off the gas, empty the spaghetti into a colander, 



top it with tomato sauce Fve heated in a saucepan, then eat. It's overcooked, thanks to that pointless 
telephone call. No matter of life-and-death, nor am I in any mood to fuss over the subtleties of 
cooking spaghetti — Fmtoo hungry. I simply listen to the radio playing send-off music for two hundred 
fifty grams of spaghetti as I eagerly dispatch every last strand to my stomach. 

I wash up plate and pans while boiling a kettle of water, then pour a cup for a tea bag. As I drink 
my tea, I think about that phone call. 

So we could come to an unders tanding? 

What on earth did that woman mean, calling me up like that? And who on earth was she? 

The whole thing is a mystery. I can't recall any woman ever telephoning me before without 
identifying herself, nor do I have the slightest clue what she could have wanted to talk about. 

What the hell, I tell myself, what do I care about understanding some strange woman's feelings, 
anyway? What possible good could come of it? What matters now is that I fmd a job. Then I can settle 
into a new life cycle. 

Yet even as I return to the sofa to resume the Len Deighton novel I took out of the library, the mere 
glimpse out of the corner of my eye of the telephone sets my mind going. Just what were those 
feelings that would take ten minutes to come to an understanding about? I mean, really, ten minutes to 
come to an understanding of our feelings? 

Come to think of it, the woman specified precisely ten minutes right from the start. Seems she was 
quite certain about that exact amount of time. As if nine minutes would have been too short, eleven 
minutes maybe too long. Just like for spaghetti al dente. 

What with these thoughts running through my head, I lose track of the plot of the novel. So I decide 
to do a few quick exercises, perhaps iron a shirt or two. Whenever things get in a muddle, I always 
iron shirts. A habit of long standing with me. 

I di vide the shirt-ironing process into twelve steps total: from (1) Collar <Front>, to (12) Cuff 
<Left Sleeve>. Absolutely no deviation from that order. One by one, I count off the steps. The ironing 
doesn't go right if I don't. 

So there I am, ironing my third shirt, enjoying the hiss of the steam iron and the distinctive smell of 
hot cotton, checking for wrinkles before hanging up each shirt in the wardrobe. I switch off the iron 
and put it away in the closet with the ironing board. 

I'm getting thirsty by now and am heading to the kitchen for some water when once more the 
telephone rings. Here we go again, I think. And for a moment I wonder whether I shouldn't just ignore 
it and keep on going into the kitchen. But you never know, so I retrace my steps back to the living 
room and pick up the receiver. If it's that woman again, I' 11 say I'm in the middle of ironing and hang 
up. 

The call, however, is frommy wife. By the clockatop the TV, it's eleven- thirty. 

"How're things?" she asks. 

"Fine," I answer, relieved. 

"What've you beenup to?" 

"Ironing." 

"Is anything wrong?" my wife asks. A slight tension invades her voice. She knows all about my 
ironing when I'm unsettled. 



"Nothing at all. I just felt like ironing some shirts. No particular reason," I say, switching the 
receiver from right hand to left as I sit down on a chair. "So, is there something you wanted to tell me 
about?" 

"Yes, it's about work. There's the possibility of ajob." 

"Uh-huh," I say. 

"Can you write poetry?" 

"Poetry?" I shoot back in surprise. What's this about poetry? 

"A magazine company where someone I know works puts out this popular fiction monthly for young 
girls and they're looking for someone to select and brush up poetry submissions. Then they want one 
leadoff poem each month for the section. The work' s easy and the pay's not bad. Of course it's only 
part-time, but if things go well they might string you on for editorial work and — " 

"Easy?" I say. "Now hold onjust one minute. I've been looking for a position with a law firm. Just 
where do you come up with this brushing up of poetry?" 

"Well, didn't you say you used to do some writing in high school?" 

"In a newspaper. The high-school newspaper. Such-and-such team won the soccer meet; the 
physics teacher fell down the stairs and had to go to the hospital. Dumb little articles like that I wrote. 
Not poetry. I can't write poetry." 

"Not real poetry, just the kind of poems high-school girls might read. They don't even have to be 
that good. It's not like they're expecting you to write like Allen Ginsberg. Just whatever you can make 
do." 

'T absolutely cannot write make-do poetry," I snap. The very idea. 

"Hrnph," pouts my wife. "This talk of legal work, though. Nothing seems to be materializing, does 
it?" 

"Several prospects have come my way already. The final word'll be in sometime this week. If 
those fail through, maybe then I' 11 consider it." 

"Oh? Have it your way, then. But say, what day is it today?" 

"Tuesday," I tell her after a moment's thought. 

"Okay, then, could you stop by the bank and pay the gas and phone bills?" 

"Sure thing. I was going out to shop for dinner soon, anyway. I can take care of it at the same time." 
"And what are we having for dinner?" 

"Hmm, let's see," I say. "Haven't made up my mind yet. I thought I'd decide when I go shopping." 

"You know," my wife starts in with a new tone of voice, "I've been thinking. Maybe you don't 
really need to be looking for work." 

"And why not?" I spit out. Yet more surprises? Is every woman in the world out to shake me up 
over the phone? "Why don't I have to be looking for work? Another three months and my 
unemployment compensation is due to run out. No time for idle hands." 

"My salary's gone up, and my side job is going well, not to mention we have plenty in savings. So 
if we don't go overboard on luxuries, we should be able to keep food on the table." 

"And I'd do the housework?" 



"Is that so bad?" 

"I don't know," I say in all honesty. I really don't know. "I' 11 have to think it over." 

"Do think it over," reiterates my wife. "Oh, and by the way, has the cat come back?" 

"The cat?" F m caught off guard, then I realize I'd completely forgotten about the cat all morning. 
"No, doesn't seemso." 

"Could you scout around the neighborhood a bit? He's been gone four days now." 

I give some spur-of-the-moment reply, switching the receiver back to my right hand. 

"My guess is that the cat's probably in the yard of that vacant house at the end of the passage. The 
yard with the stone bird figurine. Fve seen him there often enough. You know where F m talking 
about?" 

"No, Fm afraid I don't," I say. "And since when have you been snooping around in the passage on 
your own? Never once have you mentioned — " 

"You' 11 have to forgive me, but Fve got to hang up. Have to be getting back to work. Don't forget 
about the cat, now." 

And the telephone cuts off. 

I sit there looking dumbly at the receiver a second before setting it down. 

Now why would my wife know so much about the passage? I can't figure it out. She'd have to 
climb over a high cinder-block wali to get there from our yard, and what possible reason was there to 
go to all that trouble to begin with? 

I go to the kitchen for that drink of water, turn on the FM radio, and trim my nails. They're doing a 
feature on Robert Plant's new album I listen to two songs before my ears start to hurt and I switch the 
thing off. I go out to the porch to check the cat's food dish; the dried fish I put in the previous night 
hasn't been touched. Guess the cat really hasn't come back. 

Standing there on the porch, I look at the bright spring sun slicing down into our tiny yard. Hardly 
the sort of yard that lingers fondly in the mind. The sun hits here only the briefest part of the day, so 
the soil is always dark and damp. Not much growing: just a couple of unremarkable hydrangeas. And 
I' m not terribly crazy about hydrangeas in the first place. 

From a nearby stand of trees comes the periodic scree-ee-eech of a bird, sharp as a tightening 
spring. The "wind-up bird," we call it. My wife's name for it. I have no idea what it's really called. 
Nor even what it looks like. Nonetheless, this wind-up bird is there every morning in the trees of the 
neighborhood to wind things up. Us, our quiet little world, everything. 

As I listen to the wind-up bird, I' m thinking, Why on earth is it up to me to go searching after that 
cat? And more to the point, even if I do chance to find it, what am I supposed to do then? Drag the cat 
home and lecture it? Plead with it — Listen, you've had everyone worried sick, so why don't you 
come home? 

Great, I think. Just great. What' s wrong with letting a cat go where it wants to go and do what it 
wants to do? Here I am, thirty years old, and what am I doing? Washing clothes, planning dinner 
menus, chasing after cats. 

Not so long ago, I' m thinking, I was your regular sort of guy. Fired up with ambition. In high 
school, I read Clarence Darrow's autobiography and decided to become a lawyer. My grades weren't 
bad. And in my senior year I was voted by my classmates runner-up "Most Likely to Succeed." I even 



got accepted into the law department of a comparatively reputable university. So where had I 
screwed up? 

I plant my elbows on the kitchen table, prop up my chin, and think: When the hell did the compass 
needle get out of whack and lead my life astray? It's more than I can figure. There's nothing I can 
really put my finger on. No setbacks from student politics, no disillusionment with university, never 
really had much giri trouble. As near as I can tell, Fve had a perfectly normal existence. Yet one day, 
when it came time for me to be graduating, I suddenly realized I wasn't the same guy I used to be. 

Probably, the seed of a schism had been there all along, however microscopic. But in time the gap 
widened, eventually taking me out of sight of who I was supposed to be. In terms of the solar system, 
if you will, I should by now have reached somewhere between Saturn and Uranus. A little bit farther 
and I ought to be seeing Pluto. And beyond that — let's see — was there anything after that? 

At the beginning of February, I quit my longtime job at the law firm. And for no particular reason. It 
wasn't that I was fed up with the work. Granted, it wasn't what you could call an especially thrilling 
job, but the pay wasn't bad and the atmosphere around the office was friendly enough. 

My role at the firm was, in a word, that of full-time office boy. 

Although I still believe I did a good job of it, by my standards. Strange as it may sound coming 
from my own mouth, I fmd Fm really very capable when it comes to carrying out immediate tasks 
around the office like that. I catch on quickly, operate methodically, think practically, don't complain. 

That's why, when I told the senior partner I wanted to quit, the old man — the father half of this " 

and Son, Attorneys at Law" — even offered to raise my salary if I'd just stay on. 

But stay on I didn't. I don't exactly know why I up and quit. Didn't even have any clear goals or 
prospects of what to do after quitting. The idea of holing up somewhere and cramming for one more 
shot at the bar exam was too intimidating. And besides, I didn't even especially want to become a 
lawyer at that point. 

When I came out and told my wife over dinner I was thinking of quitting my job, all she said was 
"Fair enough." Just what that "Fair enough" was supposed to mean, I couldn't tell. But that was the 
extent of it; she didn't volunteer a word more. 

When I then said nothing, she spoke up. "If you feel like quitting, why don't you quit? It's your life, 
you should do with it as you like." She'd said her piece and was straightaway deboning the fish on 
her plate with her chopsticks. 

My wife does office work at a design school and really doesn't do badly, salarywise. Sometimes 
she gets illustration assignments from editor friends, and not for unreasonable pay, either. I, on my 
part, was eligible for six months' unemployment compensation. So if I stayed home and did the 
housework regularly every day, we could even swing a few expenses like eating out and dry cleaning, 
and our life-style wouldn't change all that much from when I was working and getting a salary. 

So it was I quit my job. 

IAj twelve-thirty I go out shopping as usual, a large canvas carryall siung over my shoulder. First I stop by 
the bank to pay the gas and telephone bills, then I shop for dinner at the supermarket, then I have a 
cheeseburger and coffee at McDonald's. 

I return home and am putting the groceries away in the refrigerator when the telephone rings. It 
sounds positively irritated, the way it rings. I leave a half-opened plastic tub of tofu on the table, head 



into the living room, and pick up the receiver. 

"Finished with your spaghetti?" It's that woman again. 

"Yeah, I'm done," I say. "But now I have to go out looking for the cat." 

"Can't that wait ten minutes? Looking for the cat!" 

"Well, ten minutes, maybe." 

What the hell am I doing?, I think. Why am I obliged to spend ten minutes passing the time of day 
with some strange woman? 

"Now, then, perhaps we can come to an understanding," says the woman, nice and quiet. From the 
sound of it, this woman — whoever she is — is settling back into a chair there on the other end of the 
line, crossing her legs. 

"Hmm, I don't know about that," I say. "Some people, ten years together and they still can't 
understand each other." 

"Care to try?" the woman teases. 

I undo my wristwatch and switch on the stopwatch mode, then press the timer's start button. 
"Why me?" I ask. "Why not ring up somebody else?" 

"I have my reasons," the woman enunciates slowly, as if measuredly masticating a morsel of food. 
"Fve heard all about you." 

"When? Where?" 

"Sometime, somewhere," the woman says. "But what does that matter? The important thing is now. 
Right? What's more, talking about it only loses us time. It's not as ifl had all the time in the world, 
you know. " 

"Give me some proof, then. Proof that you know me." 
"For instance." 
"How about my age?" 

"Thirty," the woman answers on the spot. "Thirty and two months. Good enough?" 

That shuts me up. The woman really does know me. Yet no matter how I rack my brains, I can't 
place her voice. I simply couldn't have forgotten or confused someone's voice. Faces, names — maybe 
— but voices, never. 

"Well, now, it's your turn to see what you can tell about me," she says suggestively. "What do you 
imagine from my voice? What kind of woman am I? Can you picture me? This sort of thing's your 
forte, isn't it?" 

"You got me," I say. 

"Go ahead, try," the woman insists. 

I glance at my watch. Not quite a minute and a half so far. I heave a sigh of resignation. Seems Fve 
already taken her up, and once the challenge is on, there's no turning back. I used to have a knack for 
guessing games. 

"Late twenties, university graduate, native Tokyoite, upper-middle-class upbringing," I fire away. 

"Amazing," says the woman, flicking a cigarette lighter by the receiver. A Cartier, by the sound of 
it. "Keep going." 



"Fairly good-looking. At least, you yourself think so. But you' ve got a complex. You're too short or 
your breasts are too small or something like that." 

"Pretty close," the woman giggles. 

"You're married. But all's not as smooth as it could be. There are problems. No woman without 
her share of problems would call up a man and not give her name. Yet I don't know you. At least Fve 
never talked with you before. This much imagined, I still can't picture you." 

"Oh, really?" says the woman in a hush calculated to drive a soft wedge into my skull. "How can 
you be so sure of yourself? Mightn't you have a fatal blind spot somewhere? If not, don't you think 
you' d have pulled yourself a little more together by now? Someone with your brains and talent." 

"You put great stock in me," I say. "I don't know who you are, but I should tell you I' m not the 
wonderful human being you make me out to be. I don't seem to be able to get things done. Ali I do is 
head off down detour after detour." 

"Still, I used to have a thing for you. A long time ago, that is." 

"A long time ago, you say," I prompt. 

Two minutes fifty-three seconds. 

"Not so very long ago. We're not talking history." 

"Yes, we are talking history," I say. 

Blind spot, eh? Well, perhaps the woman does have a point. Somewhere, in my head, in my body, 
in my very existence, it's as if there were some long-lost subterranean element that's been skewing 
my life ever so slightly off. 

No, not even that. Not slightly off — way off. Irretrievably. 

"I' m in bed right now," the woman says. "I just took a shower and have nothing on." 

That does it, I think. Nothing on? A regular porno tape this is getting to be. 

"Or would you rather I put on panties? How about stockings? Do they turn you on?" 

"Anything's fme. Do what you like," I say. "But if you don't mind, F m not that kind of a guy, not for 
this sort of stuff over the telephone." 

"Ten minutes, that's all. A mere ten minutes. That's not such a fatal loss, is it? Fm not asking for 
anything more. That much is plain goodwill. But whatever, just answer the question. Do you want me 
naked? Or should I put something on? Fve got all kinds of things, you know. Garter belts and ..." 

Garter belts? I must be going crazy. What woman has garter belts in this day and age? Models for 
Penthouse, maybe. 

"Naked is fme. And you don't have to move," I say. 

Four minutes down. 

"My pubic hair is still wet," the woman says. 'T didn't towel it dry. So it's still wet. Warm and oh 
so wet." 

"Listen, if you don't mind — " 

"And down below that, it's a whole lot warmer. Just like hot buttercream. Oh so very hot. Honest. 
And what position do you think I' m in right now? I have my knee up and my left leg spread out to the 
side. It'd be around 10:05 if I were a clock." 



I could tell from the way she said it that she wasn't making this up. She really did have her legs 
spread to 10:05, her vagina warmand moistened. 

"Caress the lips. Gently, slowly. Then open them. Slowly, like that. Now caress them gently with 
the sides of your fingers. Oh, yes, slowly . . . slowly. Now let one hand fondle my left breast, from 
underneath, lifting gently, tweaking the nipple just so. Again and again. Until F m about to come — " 

I hang up without a word. Then I roli over on the sofa, smoke a cigarette, and gaze up at the ceiling, 
stopwatch clicked at five minutes twenty-three seconds. 

I close my eyes and darkness descends, a darkness painted blind with colors. 

What is it? Why can't everyone just leave me inpeace? 

Not ten minutes later, the telephone rings again, but this time I don't pick up. Fifteen rings and it 
stops. I let it die, and all gravity is displaced by a profound silence. The stone-chill silence of 
boulders frozen deep into a glacier fifty thousand years ago. Fifteen rings of the telephone have utterly 
transformed the quality of the air around me. 

A LITTLE BEFORE two o'clock, I climb from my backyard over the cinder-block wali into the passage. 
Actually, it's not the corridor you'd expect a passage to be; that's only what we call it for lack of a 
better name. Strictly speaking, it isn't a corridor at all. A corridor has an entrance and an exit, 
forming a route from one place to another. 

But this passage has neither entrance nor exit, and leads smack into a cinder-block wali at one end 
and a chain link fence at the other. It's not even an alleyway. For starters, an alley has to at least have 
an entrance. The neighbors all call it "the passage" for convenience sake. 

The passage meanders between everyone's backyards for about six hundred feet. Three-foot- 
something in width for the most part, but what with all the junk lying around and the occasional hedge 
cropping in, there are places you can barely squeeze through sideways. 

From what I've heard — this is from a kindly uncle of mine who rents us our house ridiculously 
cheap — the passage used to have an entrance and an exit, offering a shortcut across the block, street- 
to-street. But then, with the postwar boom years, new homes were built in any available space, 
hemming in the common ground to a narrow path. Which ushered in the none-too-inviting prospect of 
having strangers walking through backyards, practically under the eaves, so the residents 
surreptitiously covered the entrance. At first an innocent little bush barely disguised the opening, but 
eventually one resident expanded his yard and extended his cinder-block wali to completely seal it 
over. While the corresponding other aperture was screened off with a chain link fence to keep the 
dogs out. It hadn't been the residents who made use of the passage to begin with, so no one 
complained about its being closed at both ends. And anyway, closing it wouldn't hurt as a crime- 
prevention measure. Thus, the path went neglected and untrafficked, like some abandoned canal, 
merely serving as a kind of buffer zone between the houses, the ground overgrown with weeds, sticky 
spider webs strung everywhere a bug could possibly alight. 

Now, why should my wife frequent such a place? It was beyond me. Me, I'd only set foot in the 
passage one time before. And she can't even stand spiders. 

Yet when I try to think, my head's filled to bursting with some gaseous substance. I didn't sleep 
well last night, plus the weather's too hot for the beginning of May, plus there was that unnerving 
telephone call. 



Oh, well, I think, might as well look for that cat. Leave later developments for later. Anyway, it's a 
damn sight better to be out and about than to be cooped up indoors waiting for the telephone to ring. 

The spring sun cuts clean and crisp through the ceiling of overhanging branches, scattering patches 
of shadow across the ground. With no wind, the shadows stay glued in place like fateful stains. 
Telltale stains sure to eling to the earth as it goes around and around the sun for millennia to come. 

Shadows flit over my shirt as I pass under the branches, then return to the ground. Ali is sti.ll. You 
can almost hear each blade of grass respiring in the sunlight. A few small clouds float in the sky, 
vivid and well formed, straight out of a medieval engraving. Everything stands out with such clarity 
that I feel buoyant, as if somehow my body went on forever. That, and it's terribly hot. 

I'm in a T-shirt, thin cotton slacks, and tennis shoes, but already, just walking around, my armpits 
and the eleft of my chest are drenched with sweat. I'd only just this morning pulled the T-shirt and 
slacks out of storage, so every time I take a deep breath there's this sharp mothball smell, as if some 
tiny bug had flown up my nose. 

I keep an eye peeled to both sides and walk at a slow, even pace, stopping from time to time to call 
the cat' s name in a stage whisper. 

The homes that sandwich the passage are of two distinet types and blend together as well as liquids 
of two different specific gravities. First there are the houses dating from way back, with big 
backyards; then there are the comparatively newer ones. None of the new houses has any yard to 
speak of; some don't have a single speck of yard space. Scarcely enough roombetween the eaves and 
the passage to hang out two lines of laundry. In some places, elothes actually hang out over the 
passage, foreing me to ineh past rows of still-dripping towels and shirts. I'm so elose I can hear 
televisions playing and toilets flushing inside. I even smell curry cooking in one kitehen. 

The old homes, by contrast, hardly betray a breath of life. Judiciously placed hedges of cypress and 
other shrubbery guard against inquisitive eyes, although here and there you cateh a glimpse of a well- 
manicured spread. The houses themselves are of all different architectural styles: traditional Japanese 
houses with long hallways, tarnished copper-roofed early Western villas, recently remodeled 
"modern" homes. Common to all, however, is the absence of any visible occupants. Not a sound, not 
a hint of life. No noticeable laundry, either. 

It's the first time I've taken in the sights of the passage at leisure, so everything is new to my eyes. 
Propped up in a corner of one backyard is a lone, withered, brown Christmas tree. In another yard 
lies several childhoods' worth of every plaything imaginable — a virtual serap heap of trieyele parts, 
a ringtoss set, plastic samurai swords, rubber balls, a toy turtle, wooden trucks. One yard sports a 
basketball hoop, another a fine set of garden chairs and a rattan table. By the look of them, the chairs 
haven't been sat on in months (maybe years), they're so covered with dirt; the tabletop is rain- 
plastered with lavender magnolia petals. 

One house presents a elear view into its living room through large glass sliding doors. There I see 
a kidney-shaped sofa with matehing lounge furniture, a sizable television, a cellarette topped with a 
tank of tropical fish and two trophies of some sort, and a decorator floor lamp. It all looks as unreal 
as a set for a TV siteom. 

In another yard, there's a massive doghouse penned in with wire sereening. No dog inside that I can 
see, though. Just a wide-open hole. I also notice that the sereening is stretehed shapeless, bulging out 
as if someone or something had been leaning into it for months. 



The vacant house my wife told me about is only a little farther along, past the one with the 
doghouse. Right away, I can see it's vacant. One looktells you that this is not your scant two-or three- 
months' absence. The place is a fairly new two-story affair, yet the tight shutters look positively 
weather-beaten and the rusted railings around the upstairs windows seem about ready to fail off. The 
smallish yard hosts a stone figurine of a bird with wings outstretched atop a chest-high pedestal 
surrounded by a thicket of weeds, the taller stalks of goldenrod reaching clear to the bird's feet. The 
bird — beats me what kind — fmds this encroachment most distressing and flaps its wings to take flight 
at any second. 

Besides this stone figurine, the yard has little in the way of decoration. Two beat-up old vinyl 
chaises are parked neatly under the eaves, right next to an azalea blazing with ethereally crimson 
blossoms. Otherwise, weeds are about all that meets the eye. 

I lean against the chest-high chain link fence and make a brief survey of the yard. Just the sort of 
yard a cat would love, but hope as I might, nothing catty puts in an appearance. On the rooftop TV 
aerial, a pigeon perches, its monotone carrying everywhere. The shadow of the stone bird falls across 
the tangle of weeds, their blades cutting it into fragments of different shapes. 

I take a cigarette out of my pocket, light up, and smoke it, leaning against the fence the whole while. 
The pigeon doesn't budge from the aerial as it goes on cooing nonstop. 

Cigarette finished and stamped out on the ground, I still don't move for the longest time. Just how 
long, I don't know. Half asleep, I stare dumbly at the shadow of the bird, hardly even thinking. 

Or maybe I am thinking, somewhere out of range of my conscious mind. Phenomenologically 
speaking, however, I'm simply staring at the shadow of the bird falling over stalks of grass. 

Gradually I become aware of something — a voice? — filtering into the bird's shadow. Whose 
voice? Someone seems to be calling me. 

I turn around to look behind me, and there, in the yard opposite, stands a giri of maybe fifteen or 
sixteen. Petite, with short, straight hair, she's wearing dark sunglasses with amber frames and a light- 
blue Adidas T-shirt with the sleeves snipped off at the shoulders. The slender arms protruding from 
the openings are exceedingly well tanned for only May. One hand in her shorts, the other on a low 
bamboo gate, she props herself up precariously. 

"Hot, huh?" the giri greets me. 

"Hot all right," I echo. 

Here we go again, I think — again. All day long it's going to be females striking up conversations 
with me, is it? 

"Say, you got a cigarette?" the giri asks. 

I puli a pack of Hope regulars from my pocket and offer it to her. She withdraws her hand from her 
shorts, extracts a cigarette, and examines it a second before putting it to her mouth. Her mouth is 
small, with the slightest hint of a curi to her upper lip. I strike a match and give her a light. She leans 
forward, revealing an ear: a freshly formed, soap-smooth, pretty ear, its delicate outline glistening 
with a tracery of fme hairs. 

She parts her lips in the center with an accomplished air and lets out a satisfied puff of smoke, then 
looks up at me as if she's suddenly remembered something. I see my face split into two reflections in 
her sunglasses. The lenses are so hideously dark, and even mirror-coated, that there 's no way to make 
out her eyes. 



"You fromthe neighborhood?" the giri asks. 

"Yeah," I reply, and am about to point toward the house, only I can't tell if it's really the right 
direction or not. What with all these odd turns getting here. So — what's the difference, anyway? — I 
simply point any which way. 

"What you been up to over there so long?" 

"F m looking for a cat. It's been missing three or four days now," I explain, wiping a sweaty palm 
on my slacks. "Someone said they saw the cat around here." 

"What kindof cat?" 

"A big tom. Brown stripes, a slight kink at the end of its tail." 

"Name?" 

"Name ...?" 

"The cat's. It has a name, no?" she says, peering into my eyes frombehind her sunglasses — at least, 
I guess she is. 

"Noboru," I reply. "Noboru Watanabe." 

"Fancy name for a cat." 

"It's my brother-in-law's name. My wife's little joke. Says it somehow reminds her of him" 
"Like how?" 

"The way it moves. Its walk, the sleepy look in its eyes. Little things." 

Only then does the giri smile. And as she lets down her facade, I can see she 's much more of a 
child than I thought on first impression. The quirky curi of her upper lip shoots out at a strange angle. 

Caress, I can swear I hear someone say. The voice of that telephone woman. Not the girl's voice. I 
wipe the sweat from my brow with the back of my hand. 

"A brown-striped cat with a kink in the end of its tail, huh?" the giri reconfirms. "Wearing a 
collar?" 

"A blackflea collar." 

The giri gives it a cool ten-, fifteen-second think, hand still resting on the gate. Whereupon she 
flicks the stub of her cigarette to the ground by my feet. 

"Stamp that out for me? I got bare feet." 

I conscientiously grind it out under the sole of my tennis shoe. 

"That cat, I think I just may have seen it," she phrases guardedly 'T didn't get as far as noticing the 
tip of its tail, but yes, there was a brown tom Big, probably wearing a collar." 

"When did you see it?" 

"Yeah, when was that? F m sure I must've seen it lots of times. Fm out here in the yard nearly every 
day sunbathing, so one day just blends into the rest. But anyway, it'd have to be within the last three 
or four days. The yard's a cat shortcut, all kinds of cats scooting through all the time. They come out 
of the Suzukis' hedge there, cut across our yard, and head into the Miyawakis' yard." 

So saying, she points over at the vacant house. Same as ever, there's the stone bird with outspread 
wings, goldenrod basking in the spring rays, pigeon cooing away on the TV aerial. 



"Thanks for the tip," I tell her. 

"Hey, Fve got it, why not come into the yard here and wait? Ali the cats pass this way anyhow. 
And besides, if you keep snooping around over there, somebody's going to mistake you for a burglar 
and call the cops. Wouldn't be the first time." 

"But I can't just hang around waiting for a cat in somebody else's yard." 

"Sure you can, like, it's no big deal. Nobody's home and it's dead boring without someone to talk 
to. Why don't we just get some sun, the two of us, until the cat shows up? Fve got sharp eyes, I'd be a 
real help." 

I look at my watch. Two thirty-six. Ali Fve got left to do today is take in the laundry and fix dinner. 

"Well, okay, Fll stay until three o'clock," I say, still not really grasping the situation. 

I open the gate and step in, following the giri across the grass, and only then do I notice that she's 
dragging her left leg slightly. Her tiny shoulders sway with the periodic rhythm of a crank grinding 
mechanically to the left. She stops a few steps ahead of me and signals for me to walk alongside her. 

"Had an accident last month," the giri says simply "Was riding on the back of someone's bike and 
got thrown off. No luck." 

Two canvas deck chairs are set out in the middle of the grass. A big blue towel is draped over the 
back of one chair, and the other is occupied by a red Marlboro box, an ashtray, and a lighter tossed 
together with a large radio-cassette player and some magazines. The volume is on low, but some 
unidentifiable hard-rock group is playing. 

She removes the clutter to the grass and asks me to sit down, switching off the music. No sooner am 
I seated than I get a clear view of the passage and the vacant house beyond. I can even see the white 
stone bird figurine and the goldenrod and the chain link fence. I bet she's been watching me from here 
the whole time. 

The yard is large and unpretentious. The grass sweeps down a gentle slope, graced here and there 
with plants. To the left of the deck chairs is a sizable concrete pond, which obviously hasn't seen 
much use of late. Drained of water, it presents a greenish, discolored bottom to the sun, like some 
overturned aquatic creature. The elegant beveled facade of an old Western-style house, neither 
particularly large nor all that luxurious, poses behind a stand of trees to the rear. Only the yard is of 
any scale or shows any real upkeep. 

"Once, I used to part-time for a lawn-mowing service," I say. 

"Oh yeah?" says the giri without much interest. 

"Must be hard work maintaining a yard this big," I comment, looking around me. 
"Don't you have a yard?" 

"Just a little yard. Two, three hydrangeas, that's about the size of it," I say. "You alone here all the 
time?" 

"Yeah, you said it. Daytime, I' m always alone. Mornings and evenings, a maid comes around, 
though otherwise I' m alone. Say, how about a cold drink? There 's evenbeer." 

"No, I'mfme." 

"Really? Like, it's no big deal." 

"Fmnot thirsty," I say. "Don't you go to school?" 



"Don't you go to work?" 
"No work to go to," I admit. 
"Unemployed?" 
"Kind of. I quit." 

"What sort of work were you doing?" 

"Lawyer's gofer," I equivocate, taking a slow, deep breath to cut the talk. "Collecting papers from 
city-hall and government orTices, filing materials, checking case precedents, taking care of court 
procedures, busy worklike that." 

"But you quit?" 

"Correct." 

"Your wife work?" 

"She does ," I say. 

I take out a cigarette and put it to my mouth, strike a match, and light up. The wind-up bird 
screeches from a nearby tree. A good twelve or thirteen turns of the watch spring, then it flits off to 
another tree. 

"Cats are always going past there," the giri remarks apropos of nothing, pointing over at the edge of 
the grass in front. "See that incinerator behind the Suzukis' hedge? Well, they come out from right next 
to it, run all the way across, duck under the gate, and make for the yard over there. Always the same 
route. Say, you know Mr. Suzuki? College professor, on TV half the time?" 

"Mr. Suzuki?" 

She goes on in some detail, but it turns out that I don't know our Mr. Suzuki. 
"I hardly ever watch TV," I say. 

"Horrible family," the giri sneers. "Stuck-up, the whole lot of them. TV people are all a bunch of 
phonies." 

"Oh?" 

The giri picks up her Marlboros, takes one out, and rolls it around unlit between her fmgers. 

"Well, I suppose there's decent folk among them, but they' re not my type. Now, the Miyawakis, 
they were okay people. Mrs. Miyawaki was nice. And Mr. Miyawaki, he ran two or three family 
restaurants." 

"What happened to them?" 

"Don't know," said the giri, flicking the end of her cigarette. "Probably owed money. There was a 
real commotion when they left. Been gone two years now, I guess. Dropped everything and just left. 
The cats just keep multiplying, no consideration. Mom's always complaining." 

"Are there that many cats?" 

She puts the cigarette to her lips and lights up with her lighter. Then nods. 

"All kinds of cats. Some losing their fur, even a one-eyed cat ... big lump of flesh where the eye 
was. Gross, huh?" 

"Gross," I concur. 



'Tve got a cousin with six fmgers. A giri, little older than me, has this baby pinkie right beside her 
little finger. Always keeps it neatly folded under, so you canbarely tell. A real pretty giri." 

"Hmm," I say. 

"You think stuff like that's hereditary? Like, you know . . . runs in the blood?" 
"I couldn't tell you," I say. 

The giri says nothing for the moment. I smoke my cigarette and train my eyes on the cat path. Not a 
single cat has shown the whole time. 

"Hey, you sure you won't drink something? F m going to have a cola," says the giri. 

"No thanks," I tell her. 

The giri gets up from her deck chair and disappears into the shade, dragging her leg; meanwhile, I 
pick up one of the magazines lying by my feet and flip through the pages. Contrary to what I'd 
expected, it's a men's monthly. The center spread has a woman sitting in anunnatural pose, legs wide 
apart, so that you can see her genitals and pubic hair through a sheer body stocking. Never a duli 
moment, I think, and put the magazine back where I found it, then redirect my gaze toward the cat path, 
arms folded across my chest. 

After what seems like ages, the giri returns, glass of cola in hand. She's shed her Adidas T-shirt for 
a bikini top with her shorts. It's a small bra that shows off the full shape of her breasts, with tie- 
strings in back. 

For sure, it's one hot afternoon. Just lying there in the sun on the deck chair, my gray T-shirt is 
blotched dark with sweat. 

"Tell me," the giri picks up where she left off, "suppose you found out the giri you liked had a sixth 
finger, what would you do?" 

"F d sell her to the circus," I say. 

"Really?" 

"Just kidding," I come back, startled. 'T probably wouldn't mind." 
"Even if there 's the possibility of passing it on to your kids?" 
I give it some thought. 

"I don't think I'd mind. One finger too many's no great harm." 
"What about if she had four breasts?" 
I think it over a while. 
'T don't know," I say. 

Four breasts? This conversation's going nowhere fast, so I decide to change the subject. 
"How old are you?" 

"Sixteen," the giri answers. "Just turned sixteen. Freshman in high school." 
"But you' re taking time off from school." 

"Can't walk too much before my leg starts to hurt. Got a gash right by my eye, too. It's a pretty 
straight school, no telling what kind of trouble I'd be in if they found out I hurt myself falling off a 
bike ... which is why I' m out sick. I can take a whole year off if I want. I' m in no big hurry to 
graduate from high school." 



"Hmm" is all I can say. 

"But anyway, back to what we were talking about, you said you thought it was okay to marry a giri 
with six fmgers, but four breasts turned you off." 

"I didn't say it turned me off, I just said I didn't know." 

"Why don't you know?" 

"I can't quite picture it." 

"But you can picture a sixth finger." 

"Sort of." 

"What's the difference? Six fingers or four breasts?" 

Once again, I give the matter some thought, but can't begin to think of how to explain. 

"Tell me, do I ask too many questions?" the giri asks, peering into my eyes from behind her 
sunglasses. 

"You been told that?" I ask back. 

"Sometimes." 

"Nothing wrong with asking questions. Makes the other person think." 

"Most people, though, don't give me much thought," she says, looking at the tips of her toes. 
"Everyone just gives the usual nothing-doing answers." 

I shake my head vaguely and to realign my gaze onto the cat path. What the hell am I doing here? 
There hasn 't been one lousy cat come past here yet. 

I shut my eyes for twenty or thirty seconds, arms folded across my chest. Lying there, eyes closed, I 
can feel the sweat bead up over different parts of my body On my forehead, under my nose, around 
my neck, the slightest sensations, as if tiny moistened feathers had been floated into place here and 
there. My T-shirt clings to my chest like a drooping flag on a doldrum day. The sunlight has a curious 
weight as it seeps into me. I can hear the tinkling of ice as the giri jiggles her glass. 

"Go to sleep if you want. I' 11 wake you if I see your cat," the giri whispers. 

I nod silently with eyes closed. 

For the time being, there isn't a sound. That pigeon and the wind-up bird must have gone off 
somewhere. Not a breeze, not even a car starting. The whole while F m thinking about that voice on 
the telephone. What iflreally did know the woman? 

Yet I can't recall any such woman. She' s just not there; she' s long departed from my consciousness. 
Only her long, long shadow trailing across my path, a vision from Chirico. An endless ringing in my 
ears. 

"Hey, you asleep?" comes the giri' s voice, so faint it's almost no voice at all. 
"No, I'mawake," I answer. 

"Can I get closer? It's easier for me to talk in a whisper." 
"Go right ahead," I say, eyes still closed. 

I listen as the giri slides her deck chair alongside mine, hear the dry clack of wooden frames 
touching. 



Strange, I think, the girl's voice with my eyes closed sounds completely different from her voice 
with my eyes open. What's come over me? This has never happened to me before. 

"Can I talk some?" the giri asks. "Fll be real quiet. You don't have to answer, you can even fail 
right asleep at any time." 

"Sure," I say. 

"Death. People dying. It's all so fascinating," the giri begins. 

She's whispering right by my ear, so the words enter my body in a warm, moist stream of breath. 
"How'sthat?"Iask. 

The giri places a one-finger seal over my lips. 

"No questions," she says. "I don't want to be asked anything just now. And don't open your eyes, 
either. Got it?" 

I give a nod as indistinct as her voice. 

She removes her finger from my lips, and the same finger now travels to my wrist. 

"I think about what it would be like to cut the thing open with a scalpel. Not the corpse. That lump 
of death itself. There's got to be something like that in there somewhere, I just know it. Duli like a 
softball — and pliable — a paralyzed tangle of nerves. I'd like to remove it from the dead body and cut 
it open. I' m always thinking about it. Imagining what it'd be like inside. It'd probably be all gummy, 
like toothpaste that cakes up inside the tube, don't you think? That' s okay, you don't have to answer. 
All gooey around the outside, getting tougher the further in. That's why the first thing I'd do once I cut 
through the outer skin is scoop out all the glop, and there inside where it starts to firm up would be 
this teeny little core. Like a superhard ball bearing, don't you think?" 

The giri gives a couple of short coughs. 

"Lately, it's all I think about. Probably 'cause I've got so much free time every day. But really, I do 
think so. If I've got nothing to do, my thoughts just wander off far away. I get so far off in my thoughts, 
it's hard to find my way back." 

At this, the giri takes her finger away from my wrist to drink the rest of her cola. I can tell from the 
empty-glass sound of the ice. 

"It's okay, I'm keeping an eye out for the cat. Don't worry. As soon as I see Noboru Watanabe, Fll 
let you know. So you can keep your eyes closed. Noboru Watanabe's bound to come walking through 
here any minute now. I mean, all the cats take the same route, so he's got to show up. Let's just 
imagine while we wait. Like, Noboru Watanabe's getting closer, closer. He's coming through the 
grass, sneaking under a wali, stopping and sniffmg the flowers, getting closer every minute. Try and 
picture him" 

I play along and try to see the cat in my mind's eye, but it's all I can do to conjure up even the 
blurriest backlit snapshot of a cat. The bright sun burns through my eyelids, dispersing any dark areas 
of the image; on top of which, no matter how I try I just can't recall the little fur face with any 
accuracy. My Noboru Watanabe is a failed portrait, somehow distorted and unnatural. Only the quirks 
are there; the basics are missing. I can't even remember how he walked. 

The giri places her finger on my wrist once more and this time draws a pattern. An odd diagram of 
indeterminate configuration. While she diagrams my wrist, as if in unison I feel a wholly other variety 
of darkness infiltrating my mind. I must be falling asleep, I think. Not that I'm particularly sleepy, but 



something tells me I can't hold out against the inevitable. My body feels unseemingly heavy in the soft 
canvas curve of the deck chair. 

Amid the gathering darkness, a clear image of Noboru Watanabe's four feet comes into my head. 
Four quiet brown paws with rubbery pads on the soles. Without a sound, they go traipsing over the 
terrain. 

What terrain? Where? 

I have no idea. 

Mightn 'tyou have a fatal blind spot somewhere? says the woman softly. 

I awake to find F m alone. Gone is the giri from the deck chair nestled next to mine. The towel and 
cigarettes and magazines remain, but the cola and radio-cassette player have disappeared. 

The sun is slanting westward and F m up to my ankles in the shade of the pine trees. The hands of 
my watch point to 3:40. I shake my head a few times as if rattling an empty can, get up from the chair, 
and take a look around. Everything looks the same as when I first saw it. Big lawn, dried-up pond, 
hedge, stone bird, goldenrod, TV aerial, no cat. No giri, either. 

I plunk myself down on a shady patch of grass and run my palm over the green turf, one eye on the 
cat path, while I wait for the giri to return. Ten minutes later, there's still no sign of cat or giri. Not 
even a whiff of anything moving about. F m stumped for what to do now. I feel like I must have aged 
something awful in my sleep. 

I stand up again and glance over at the house. But there's no hint of anyone about. Only the western 
sun glaring off the bay window. There's nothing to do but cut across the grass into the passage and 
beat a path home. So I didn't fmd the cat. Well, at least I tried. 

Backhome. I take in the dry laundry and throw together the makings of a simple meal. Then I collapse 
onto the living-room floor, my back against the wali, to read the evening paper. At 5:30, the telephone 
rings twelve times, but I don't pick up the receiver. After the ringing has died away, a lingering 
hollowness hovers about the dark room like drifting dust. The clock atop the TV strikes an invisible 
panel of space with its brittle claws. A regular wind-up toy world this is, I think. Once a day the 
wind-up bird has to come and wind the springs of this world. Alone in this fun house, only I grow old, 
a pale softball of death swelling inside me. Yet even as I sleep somewhere between Saturn and 
Uranus, wind-up birds everywhere are busy at work fulfilling their appointed rounds. 

I consider writing a poem about the wind-up bird. But no first lines come. Besides, I fmd it hard to 
believe that high-school girls would be terribly thrilled to read a poem about the wind-up bird. They 
don't even know that any such thing as a wind-up bird exists. 

Itsseven thirty when my wife comes home. 

"Sorry, I had to work late," she apologizes. 'T had the darnedest time tracking down one pupil 's 
tuition record. The part-time giri is so lame, it all falls to me." 

"Never mind," I say. Then I step into the kitchen, panfry a piece of fish in butter, and prepare a 
salad and miso soup. Meanwhile, my wife reads the evening paper at the kitchen table. 

"Say, weren't you home at five-thirty?" she asks. 'T tried calling to tell you I'd be a little late." 

"I ran out of butter and went out to buy some," I lie. 



"Did you remember to go to the bank?" 
"Natch," I reply. 
"How about the cat?" 
"Not a trace." 
"Oh," says my wife. 

I emerge from an after-dinner bath to find my wife sitting all alone in the darkened living room. I throw 
on a gray shirt and fumble through the dark to reach where she's been dumped like a piece of luggage. 
She looks so utterly forsaken. If only they'd left her in another spot, she might have seemed a little 
happier. 

Drying my hair with a bath towel, I take a seat on the sofa opposite her. 

"What's the matter?" I ask. 

"The cat' s dead, Ijustknow it," my wife says. 

"Oh c'mon," I protest. "He's just off exploring. Soon enough he'll get hungry and head on back. 
The same thing happened once before, remember? That time when we were still living in Koenji — " 

"This time it's different. I can feel it. The cat's dead and rotting away in the weeds. Did you search 
the grass in the yard of the vacant house?" 

"Hey now, stop it. It may be a vacant house, but it's somebody else's house. F m not about to go 
trespassing." 

"Youkilled it!" my wife accuses. 

I heave a sigh and give my head another once-over with the towel. 
"You killed it with that look of yours!" she repeats from the darkness. 

"How does that follow?" I say. "The cat disappeared of its own doing. It's not my fault. That much 
you've gotto see." 

"You! You never liked that cat, anyway!" 

"Okay, maybe so," I admit. "At least I wasn't as crazy about the cat as you were. Still, I never 
mistreated it. I fed it every day. Just because I wasn't enthralled with the little bugger doesn't mean I 
killed it. Start saying things like that and I end up having killed half the people on earth." 

"Well, that's you all over," my wife delivers her verdict. "That's just so you. Always, always that 
way. You kill everything without ever playing a hand." 

I'm about to counter when she bursts into tears. I can the speech and toss the towel into the 
bathroom basket, go to the kitchen, take a beer out of the refrigerator, and chug. What an impossible 
day it's been! One impossible day, of an impossible month, of an impossible year. 

Noboru Watanabe, where have you gone?, I think. Didn't the wind-up bird wind your spring? 

A regular poem that is: 

Noboru Watanabe 
Where have you gone? 
Didn't the wind-up bird 
Wind your spring? 

I've not finished half my beer when the telephone begins to ring. 



"Get that, will you?" I shout into the living-room darkness. 
"No way! You get it yourself," says my wife. 
"I don't want to get it," I say. 

No one answers it, and the telephone keeps on ringing. The ringing stirs up the loose dust floating 
in the dark. Neither my wife nor I venture one word. Me drinking my beer, my wife sobbing away. 
Twenty rings before I lose count and just let the thing ring. You can't keep counting forever. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



SECO N D 

B A K E R Y 

A T T A c k 



Imstillnotsure I made the right choice when I told my wife about the bakery attack. But then, it might not 
have been a question of right and wrong. Which is to say that wrong choices can produce right results, 
and vice versa. I myself have adopted the position that, in fact, we never choose anything at all. 
Things happen. Or not. 

If you look at it this way, it just so happens that I told my wife about the bakery attack. I hadn't 
been planning to bring it up — I had forgotten all about it — but it wasn't one of those now-that-you- 
mention-it kind of things, either. 

What reminded me of the bakery attack was an unbearable hunger. It hit just before two o'clock in 
the morning. We had eaten a light supper at six, crawled into bed at nine-thirty, and gone to sleep. For 
some reason, we woke up at exactly the same moment. A few minutes later, the pangs struck with the 
force of the tornado in The Wizard of Oz. These were tremendous, overpowering hunger pangs. 

Our refrigerator contained not a single item that could be technically categorized as food. We had a 
bottle of French dressing, six cans of beer, two shriveled onions, a stick of butter, and a box of 
refrigerator deodorizer. With only two weeks of married life behind us, we had yet to establish a 
precise conjugal understanding with regard to the rules of dietary behavior. Let alone anything else. 

I had a job in a law firm at the time, and she was doing secretarial work at a design school. I was 
either twenty-eight or twenty-nine — why can' 1 1 remember the exact year we married? — and she was 
two years and eight months younger. Groceries were the last things on our minds. 

We both felt too hungry to go back to sleep, but it hurt just to lie there. On the other hand, we were 
also too hungry to do anything useful. We got out of bed and drifted into the kitchen, ending up across 
the table from each other. What could have caused such violent hunger pangs? 

We took turns opening the refrigerator door and hoping, but no matter how many times we looked 
inside, the contents never changed. Beer and onions and butter and dressing and deodorizer. It might 
have been possible to saute the onions in the butter, but there was no chance those two shriveled 
onions could fiil our empty stomachs. Onions are meant to be eaten with other things. They are not the 
kind of food you use to satisfy an appetite. 

"Would madame care for some French dressing sauteed in deodorizer?" 

I expected her to ignore my attempt at humor, and she did. "Let's get in the car and look for an all- 
night restaurant," I said. "There must be one on the highway." 

She rejected that suggestion. "We can't. You' re not supposed to go out to eat after midnight." She 
was old-fashioned that way. 

I breathed once and said, "I guess not." 

Whenever my wife expressed such an opinion (or thesis) back then, it reverberated in my ears with 
the authority of a revelation. Maybe that's what happens with newlyweds, I don't know. But when she 
said this to me, I began to think that this was a special hunger, not one that could be satisfied through 
the mere expedient of taking it to an all-night restaurant on the highway. 

A special kind of hunger. And what might that be? 

I can present it here in the form of a cinematic image. 

One, I am in a little boat, floating on a quiet sea. Two, I look down, and in the water I see the peak 
of a volcano thrusting up from the ocean floor. Three, the peak seems pretty close to the water 's 
surface, but just how close I cannot tell. Four, this is because the hypertransparency of the water 



interferes with the perception of distance. 

This is a fairly accurate description of the image that arose in my mind during the two or three 
seconds between the time my wife said she refused to go to an all-night restaurant and I agreed with 
my "I guess not." Not being Sigmund Freud, I was, of course, unable to analyze with any precision 
what this image signified, but I knew intuitively that it was a revelation. Which is why — the almost 
grotesque intensity of my hunger notwithstanding — I all but automatically agreed with her thesis (or 
declaration). 

We did the only thing we could do: opened the beer. It was a lot better than eating those onions. 
She didn't like beer much, so we divided the cans, two for her, four for me. While I was drinking the 
first one, she searched the kitchen shelves like a squirrel in November. Eventually, she turned up a 
package that had four butter cookies in the bottom. They were leftovers, soft and soggy, but we each 
ate two, savoring every crumb. 

It was no use. Upon this hunger of ours, as vast and boundless as the Sinai Peninsula, the butter 
cookies and beer left not a trace. 

Time oozed through the dark like a lead weight in a fish's gut. I read the print on the aluminum beer 
cans. I stared at my watch. I looked at the refrigerator door. I turned the pages of yesterday's paper. I 
used the edge of a postcard to scrape together the cookie crumbs on the tabletop. 

'Tve never been this hungry in my whole life," she said. "I wonder if it has anything to do with 
being married." 

"Maybe," I said. "Or maybe not." 

While she hunted for more fragments of food, I leaned over the edge of my boat and looked down at 
the peak of the underwater volcano. The clarity of the ocean water all around the boat gave me an 
unsettled feeling, as if a hollow had opened somewhere behind my solar plexus — a hermetically 
sealed cavern that had neither entrance nor exit. Something about this weird sense of absence — this 
sense of the existential reality of non-existence — resembled the paralyzing fear you might feel when 
you climb to the very top of a high steeple. This connection between hunger and acrophobia was a 
new discovery for me. 

Which is when it occurred to me that I had once before had this same kind of experience. My 
stomach had been just as empty then. . . . When? . . . Oh, sure, that was — 

"The time of the bakery attack," I heard myself saying. 

"The bakery attack? What are you talking about?" 

And so it started. 

"I once attacked a bakery. Long time ago. Not a big bakery. Not famous. The bread was nothing special. 
Not bad, either. One of those ordinary little neighborhood bakeries right in the middle of a block of 
shops. Some old guy ran it who did everything himself. Baked in the morning, and when he sold out, 
he closed up for the day." 

"If you were going to attack a bakery, why that one?" 

"Well, there was no point in attacking a big bakery. All we wanted was bread, not money. We 
were attackers, not robbers." 

"We? Who'swe?" 



"My best friend back then. Ten years ago. We were so broke we couldn't buy toothpaste. Never 
had enough food. We did some pretty awflil things to get our hands on food. The bakery attack was 
one." 

"I don't get it." She looked hard at me. Her eyes could have been searching for a faded star in the 
morning sky "Why didn't you get a job? You could have worked after school. That would have been 
easier than attacking bakeries." 

"We didn't want to work. We were absolutely clear on that." 

"Well, you're working now, aren't you?" 

I nodded and sucked some more beer. Then I rubbed my eyes. A kind of beery mud had oozed into 
my brain and was struggling with my hunger pangs. 

"Times change. People change," I said. "Let's go backto bed. We've gotto getup early." 

"Fm not sleepy. I want you to tell me about the bakery attack." 

"There's nothing to tell. No action. No excitement." 

"Was it a success?" 

I gave up on sleep and ripped open another beer. Once she gets interested in a story, she has to hear 
it all the way through. That' s just the way she is. 

"Well, it was kind of a success. And kind of not. We got what we wanted. But as a holdup, it didn't 
work. The baker gave us the bread before we could take it from him." 

"Free?" 

"Not exactly, no. That's the hard part." I shook my head. "The baker was a classical-music freak, 
and when we got there, he was listening to an album of Wagner overtures. So he made us a deal. If we 
would listen to the record all the way through, we could take as much bread as we liked. I talked it 
over with my buddy and we figured, Okay It wouldn't be work in the purest sense of the word, and it 
wouldn't hurt anybody. So we put our knives back in our bag, pulled up a couple of chairs, and 
listened to the overtures to Tannhduser and The Flying Dutchman. " 

"And after that, you got your bread?" 

"Right. Most of what he had in the shop. Stuffed it in our bag and took it home. Kept us fed for 
maybe four or five days." I took another sip. Like soundless waves from an undersea earthquake, my 
sleepiness gave my boat a long, slow rocking. 

"Of course, we accomplished our mission. We got the bread. But you couldn't say we had 
committed a crime. It was more of an exchange. We listened to Wagner with him, and in return, we 
got our bread. Legally speaking, it was more like a commercial transaction." 

"But listening to Wagner is not work," she said. 

"Oh, no, absolutely not. If the baker had insisted that we wash his dishes or clean his windows or 
something, we would have turned him down. But he didn't. All he wanted from us was to listen to his 
Wagner LP from beginning to end. Nobody could have anticipated that. I mean — Wagner? It was like 
the baker put a curse on us. Now that I think of it, we should have reflised. We should have threatened 
him with our knives and taken the damn bread. Then there wouldn't have been any problem." 

"You had a problem?" 

I rubbed my eyes again. 



"Sort of. Nothing you could put your fmger on. But things started to change after that. It was kind of 
a turning point. Like, I went back to the university, and I graduated, and I started working for the firm 
and studying for the bar exam, and I met you and got married. I never did anything like that again. No 
more bakery attacks." 

"That' s it?" 

"Yup, that's all there was to it." I drank the last of the beer. Now all six cans were gone. Six pull- 
tabs lay in the ashtray like scales from a mermaid. 

Of course, it wasn't true that nothing had happened as a result of the bakery attack. There were 
plenty of things that you could easily have put your fmger on, but I didn't want to talk about them with 
her. 

"So, this friend of yours, what's he doing now?" 

'T have no idea. Something happened, some nothing kind of thing, and we stopped hanging around 
together. I haven't seen him since. I don't know what he's doing." 

For a while, she didn't speak. She probably sensed that I wasn't telling her the whole story. But she 
wasn't ready to press me on it. 

"Still," she said, "that's why you two broke up, isn't it? The bakery attack was the direct cause." 

"Maybe so. I guess it was more intense than either of us realized. We talked about the relationship 
of bread to Wagner for days after that. We kept asking ourselves if we had made the right choice. We 
couldn't decide. Of course, if you look at it sensibly, we did make the right choice. Nobody got hurt. 
Everybody got what he wanted. The baker — I still can't figure out why he did what he did — but 
anyway, he succeeded with his Wagner propaganda. And we succeeded in stuffing our faces with 
bread. 

"But even so, we had this feeling that we had made a terrible mistake. And somehow, this mistake 
has just stayed there, unresolved, casting a dark shadow on our lives. That's why I used the word 
'curse.' It's true. It was like a curse." 

"Do you think you still have it?" 

I took the six pull-tabs from the ashtray and arranged them into an aluminum ring the size of a 
bracelet. 

"Who knows? I don't know. I bet the world is full of curses. It's hard to tell which curse makes any 
one thing go wrong." 

"That's not true." She looked right at me. "You can tell, if you think about it. And unless you, 
yourself, personally break the curse, it'll stick with you like a toothache. It'll torture you till you die. 
And not just you. Me, too." 

"You?" 

"Well, F m your best friend now, aren't I? Why do you think we're both so hungry? I never, ever, 
once in my life felt a hunger like this until I married you. Don't you think it's abnormal? Your curse is 
working on me, too." 

I nodded. Then I broke up the ring of pull-tabs and put them back in the ashtray. I didn't know if she 
was right, but I did feel she was onto something. 

The feeling of starvation was back, stronger than ever, and it was giving me a deep headache. 
Every twinge of my stomach was being transmitted to the core of my head by a clutch cable, as if my 



insides were equipped with all kinds of complicated machinery. 

I took another look at my undersea volcano. The water was even clearer than before — much 
clearer. Unless you looked closely, you might not even notice it was there. It felt as though the boat 
were floating in midair, with absolutely nothing to support it. I could see every little pebble on the 
bottom. All I had to do was reach out and touch them. 

"We've only been living together for two weeks," she said, "but all this time Fve been feeling 
some kind of weird presence." She looked directly into my eyes and brought her hands together on the 
tabletop, her fmgers interlocking. "Of course, I didn't know it was a curse until now. This explains 
everything. You' re under a curse." 

"What kind of presence?" 

"Like there's this heavy, dusty curtain that hasn't been washed for years, hanging down from the 
ceiling." 

"Maybe it's not a curse. Maybe it's just me," I said, and smiled. 

She did not smile. 

"No, it's not you," she said. 

"Okay, suppose you' re right. Suppose it is a curse. What can I do about it?" 

"Attack another bakery. Right away. Now. It's the only way." 

"Now?" 

"Yes. Now. While you' re still hungry. You have to finish what you left unfinished." 

"But it's the middle of the night. Would a bakery be open now?" 

"We'll fmd one. Tokyo's a big city. There must be at least one all-night bakery." 

• • • 

We got m™ my old Corolla and started drifting around the streets of Tokyo at 2:30 a.m, looking for a 
bakery. There we were, me clutching the steering wheel, she in the navigator 's seat, the two of us 
scanning the street like hungry eagles in search of prey. Stretched out on the backseat, long and stiff as 
a dead fish, was a Remington automatic shotgun. Its shells rustled dryly in the pocket of my wife's 
windbreaker. We had two black ski masks in the glove compartment. Why my wife owned a shotgun, I 
had no idea. Or ski masks. Neither of us had ever skied. But she didn't explain and I didn't ask. 
Married life is weird, I felt. 

Impeccably equipped, we were nevertheless unable to find an all-night bakery. I drove through the 
empty streets, from Yoyogi to Shinjuku, on to Yotsuya and Akasaka, Aoyama, Hiroo, Roppongi, 
Daikanyama, and Shibuya. Late-night Tokyo had all kinds of people and shops, but no bakeries. 

Twice we encountered patrol cars. One was huddled at the side of the road, trying to look 
inconspicuous. The other slowly overtookus and crept past, finally moving off into the distance. Both 
times I grew damp under the arms, but my wife's concentration never faltered. She was looking for 
that bakery. Every time she shifted the angle of her body, the shotgun shells in her pocket rustled like 
buckwheat husks in an old-fashioned pillow. 

"Let's forget it," I said. "There aren't any bakeries open at this time of night. You' ve got to plan for 
this kind of thing or else — " 



"Stop the car!" 

I slammed on the brakes. 

"This is the place," she said. 

The shops along the street had their shutters rolled down, forming dark, silent walls on either side. 
A barbershop sign hung in the dark like a twisted, chilling glass eye. There was a bright McDonald's 
hamburger sign some two hundred yards ahead, but nothing else. 

"I don't see any bakery," I said. 

Without a word, she opened the glove compartment and pulled out a roli of cloth-backed tape. 
Holding this, she stepped out of the car. I got out my side. Kneeling at the front end, she tore off a 
length of tape and covered the numbers on the license plate. Then she went around to the back and did 
the same. There was a practiced efficiency to her movements. I stood on the curb staring at her. 

"We're going to take that McDonald's," she said, as coolly as if she were announcing what we 
would have for dinner. 

"McDonald's is not a bakery," I pointed out to her. 

"It's like a bakery," she said. "Sometimes youhave to compromise. Let's go." 

I drove to the McDonald's and parked in the lot. She handed me the blanket-wrapped shotgun. 

'T ve never fired a gun in my life," I protested. 

"You don't have to fire it. Just hold it. Okay? Do as I say. We walk right in, and as soon as they say 
'Welcome to McDonald's,' we slip on our masks. Got that?" 

"Sure, but—" 

"Then you shove the gun in their faces and make all the workers and customers get together. Fast. 
Fll do the rest." 

"But—" 

"How many hamburgers do youthink we'll need? Thirty?" 

'T guess so." With a sigh, I took the shotgun and rolled back the blanket a little. The thing was as 
heavy as a sandbag and as black as a dark night. 

"Do we really have to do this?" I asked, half to her and half to myself. 

"Of course we do." 

Wearing a McDonald's hat, the giri behind the counter flashed me a McDonald's smile and said, 
"Welcome to McDonald's." I hadn't thought that girls would work at McDonald's late at night, so the 
sight of her confused me for a second. But only for a second. I caught myself and pulled on the mask. 
Confronted with this suddenly masked duo, the giri gaped at us. 

Obviously, the McDonald's hospitality manual said nothing about how to deal with a situation like 
this. She had been starting to form the phrase that comes after "Welcome to McDonald's," but her 
mouth seemed to stiffen and the words wouldn't come out. Even so, like a crescent moon in the dawn 
sky, the hint of a professional smile lingered at the edges of her lips. 

As quickly as I could manage, I unwrapped the shotgun and aimed it in the direction of the tables, 
but the only customers there were a young couple — students, probably — and they were facedown on 
the plastic table, sound asleep. Their two heads and two strawberry-milk-shake cups were aligned on 



the table like an avant-garde sculpture. They slept the sleep of the dead. They didn't look likely to 
obstruct our operation, so I swung my shotgun back toward the counter. 

Ali together, there were three McDonald's workers. The giri at the counter, the manager — a guy 
with a pale, egg-shaped face, probably in his late twenties — and a student type in the kitchen — a thin 
shadow of a guy with nothing on his face that you could read as an expression. They stood together 
behind the register, staring into the muzzle of my shotgun like tourists peering down an Incan well. No 
one screamed, and no one made a threatening move. The gun was so heavy I had to rest the barrel on 
top of the cash register, my fmger on the trigger. 

"F 11 give you the money," said the manager, his voice hoarse. "They collected it at eleven, so we 
don't have too much, but you can have everything. We're insured." 

"Lower the front shutter and turn off the sign," said my wife. 

"Wait a minute," said the manager. 'T can't do that. FH be held responsible if I close up without 
permission." 

My wife repeated her order, slowly. He seemed torn. 
"You' d better do what she says," I warned him. 

He looked at the muzzle of the gun atop the register, then at my wife, and then back at the gun. He 
finally resigned himself to the inevitable. He turned off the sign and hit a switch on an electrical panel 
that lowered the shutter. I kept my eye on him, worried that he might hit a burglar alarm, but 
apparently McDonald's don't have burglar alarms. Maybe it had never occurred to anybody to attack 
one. 

The front shutter made a huge racket when it closed, like an empty bucket being smashed with a 
baseball bat, but the couple sleeping at their table was still out cold. Talk about a sound sleep: I 
hadn't seen anything like that in years. 

"Thirty Big Macs. For takeout," said my wife. 

"Let me just give you the money," pleaded the manager. "FH give you more than you need. You can 
go buy food somewhere else. This is going to mess up my accounts and — " 

"You' d better do what she says," I said again. 

The three of them went into the kitchen area together and started making the thirty Big Macs. The 
student grilled the burgers, the manager put them in buns, and the giri wrapped them up. Nobody said 
a word. 

I leaned against a big refrigerator, aiming the gun toward the griddle. The meat patties were lined 
up on the griddle like brown polka dots, sizzling. The sweet smell of grilling meat burrowed into 
every pore of my body like a swarm of microscopic bugs, dissolving into my blood and circulating to 
the farthest corners, then massing together inside my hermetically sealed hunger cavern, clinging to its 
pink walls. 

A pile of white-wrapped burgers was growing nearby. I wanted to grab and tear into them, but I 
could not be certain that such an act would be consistent with our objective. I had to wait. In the hot 
kitchen area, I started sweating under my ski mask. 

The McDonald's people sneaked glances at the muzzle of the shotgun. I scratched my ears with the 
little finger of my left hand. My ears always get itchy when F m nervous. Jabbing my finger into an ear 
through the wool, I was making the gun barrel wobble up and down, which seemed to bother them. It 



couldn't have gone off accidentally, because I had the safety on, but they didn't know that and I wasn't 
about to tell them 

My wife counted the finished hamburgers and put them into two small shopping bags, fifteen 
burgers to a bag. 

"Why do you have to do this?" the giri asked me. "Why don't you just take the money and buy 
something you like? What's the good of eating thirty Big Macs?" 

I shook my head. 

My wife explained, "We're sorry, really. But there weren't any bakeries open. If there had been, 
we would have attacked a bakery." 

That seemed to satisfy them. At least they didn't ask any more questions. Then my wife ordered two 
large Cokes from the giri and paid for them. 

"We're stealing bread, nothing else," she said. The giri responded with a complicated head 
movement, sort of like nodding and sort of like shaking. She was probably trying to do both at the 
same time. I thought I had some idea how she felt. 

My wife then pulled a ball of twine from her pocket — she came equipped — and tied the three to a 
post as expertly as if she were sewing on buttons. She asked if the cord hurt, or if anyone wanted to 
go to the toilet, but no one said a word. I wrapped the gun in the blanket, she picked up the shopping 
bags, and out we went. The customers at the table were still asleep, like a couple of deep-sea fish. 
What would it have taken to rouse them from a sleep so deep? 

We drove for a half hour, found an empty parking lot by a building, and pulled in. There we ate 
hamburgers and drank our Cokes. I sent six Big Macs down to the cavern of my stomach, and she ate 
four. That left twenty Big Macs in the back seat. Our hunger — that hunger that had felt as if it could go 
on forever — vanished as the dawn was breaking. The first light of the sun dyed the building's filthy 
walls purple and made a giant sonybeta ad tower glow with painful intensity. Soon the whine of highway 
truck tires was joined by the chirping of birds. The American Armed Forces radio was playing 
cowboy music. We shared a cigarette. Afterward, she rested her head on my shoulder. 

"Still, was it really necessary for us to do this?" I asked. 

"Of course it was!" With one deep sigh, she fell asleep against me. She felt as soft and as light as a 
kitten. 

Alone now, I leaned over the edge of my boat and looked down to the bottom of the sea. The 
volcano was gone. The water's calm surface reflected the blue of the sky. Little waves — like silk 
pajamas fluttering in a breeze — lapped against the side of the boat. There was nothing else. 

I stretched out in the bottom of the boat and closed my eyes, waiting for the rising tide to carry me 
where I belonged. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



KANG A R O O 

C OMmuniouE 



kJAY HEY, how's tricks? 

This morning, I paid a call on the kangaroos at the local zoo. Not your biggest zoo, but it's got the 
Standard animals. Everything from gorillas to elephants. Although if your taste runs to llamas and 
anteaters, don't go out of your way. There, you'll fmd neither Hama nor anteater. No impala or hyena, 
either. Not even a leopard. 

Instead, there are four kangaroos. 

One, an infant, born just two months ago. And a male and two females. I can't for the life of me 
figure out how they get along as a family. 

Every time I set eyes on a kangaroo, it all seems so improbable to me: I mean, what on earth would 
it feel like to be a kangaroo? For what possible reason do they go hopping around in such an ungodly 
place as Australia? Just to get killed by some clunky stick of a boomerang? 

I can't figure it out. 

Though, really, that's neither here nor there. No major issue. 
Anyway, looking at these kangaroos, I got the urge to send you a letter. 

Maybe that strikes you as odd. You ask yourself, Why should looking at kangaroos make me want 
to send you a letter? And just what is the connection between these kangaroos and me? Well, you can 
stop thinking those thoughts right now. Makes no nevermind. Kangaroos are kangaroos, you are you. 

In other words, it's like this: 

Thirty-six intricate procedural steps, followed one by one in just the right order, led me from the 
kangaroos to you — that's it. To attempt to explain each and every one of these steps would surely try 
your powers of comprehension, but more than that, I doubt I can even remember them all. 

There were thirty-six of them, after all! 

If but one of these stages had gotten screwed up, I guess I wouldn't be sending you this letter. Who 
knows? I might have ended up somewhere in the Antarctic Ocean careening about on the back of a 
spermwhale. Or maybe I'd have torched the local cigarette stand. 

Yet somehow, guided by this seemingly random convergence of thirty-six coincidences, I fmd 
myself communicating with you. 

Strange, isn't it? 
Okay, then, allow me to introduce myself. 

I am twenty-six years old and work in the product-control section of a department store. The job — as I' m 
sure you can easily imagine — is terribly boring. First of all, I check the merchandise that the 
purchasing section has decided to stock and make sure that there aren't any problems with the 
products. This is supposed to prevent collusion between the purchasing section and the suppliers, but 
actually, it's a pretty loose operation. A few tugs at shoe buckles while chatting, a nibble or two at 
sample sweets — that's about it. So much for product control. 

Then we come to another ask, the real heart of our work, which is responding to customer 
complaints. Say, for instance, two pairs of stockings just purchased developed runs one after the 
other, or the wind-up bear fell oflf the table and stopped working, or a bathrobe shrank by one fourth 
the first time through the machine — those kind of complaints. 



Well, let me tell you, the number of complaints — the sheer number — is enough to dampen anyone's 
spirits. Enough to keep four staffers racing around like crazy, day in and day out. These complaints 
include both clear-cut cases and totally unreasonable requests. Then there are those we have to puzzle 
over. For convenience sake, we've classified these into three categories: A, B, and C. And in the 
middle of the office we've got three boxes, marked A, B, and C, respectively, where we toss the 
letters. An operation we call "Trilevel Rationality Evaluation." In-house joke. Forget I mentioned it. 

Anyway, to explain these three categories, we have: 

1. Reasonable complaints. Cases where we are obliged to assume responsibility We visit the 
customers' homes bearing oxes of sweets and exchange the merchandise in question. 

2. Borderline cases. When in doubt, we play safe. Even where here is no moral obligation or 
business precedent or legal iability, we offer some appropriate gesture so as not to compromise 
the image of the department store and to avoid unnecessary trouble. 

3. Customer negligence. When clearly the customer's fault, we ffer an explanation of the situation 
and leave it at that. 

Now, as to your complaint of a few days back, we gave the matter serious consideration and 
ultimately arrived at the conclusion that your complaint was of a nature that could only be classified 
as belonging to category C. The reasons for this were — ready? listen carefully! — we cannot exchange 
(1) a record once purchased (2) one whole week later (3) without a receipt. Nowhere in the world 
can you do this. 

Do you get what F m saying? 

End of explanation of the situation. Your complaint has been duly processed. 

Nonetheless, professional viewpoint aside — and actually, I leave it aside a lot — my personal reaction to 
your plight — having mistakenly bought Mahler, not Brahms — is one of heartfelt sympathy. I kid you 
not. So it is I send you not your run-of-the-mill form letter but this in some sense more intimate 
message. 

Actually, I started to write you a letter any number of times last week. "We regret to inform you that our 
policy prohibits the exchange of records, although your letter did in some small way move me to 
personally . . . blah, blah, blah." A letter like that. Nothing I wrote, however, came out right. And it's 
not as though Fm no good at writing letters. It's just that each time I set my mind on writing you, I 
drew a blank, and the words that did come were consistently off base. Strangest thing. 

So I decided not to respond at all. I mean, why send out a botched attempt at a letter? Better to send 
nothing at all, right? At least, that's what I think: A message imperfectly communicated does about as 
much good as a screwed-up timetable. 

As fate would have it, though, this morning, standing before the kangaroo cage, I hit upon the exact 
permutation of those thirty-six coincidences and came up with this inspiration. To wit, the principle 
we shall call the Nobility of Imperfection. Now, what is this Nobility of Imperfection?, you may ask 
— who wouldn't ask? Well, simply put, the Nobility of Imperfection might mean nothing so much as 
the proposition that someone in effect forgives someone else. I forgive the kangaroos, the kangaroos 
forgive you, you forgive me — to cite but one example. 



Uh-huh. 

This cycle, however, is not perpetual. At some point, the kangaroos might take it into their heads 
not to forgive you. Please don't get angry at the kangaroos just because of that, though. It's not the 
kangaroos' fault and it's not your fault. Nor, for that matter, is it my fault. The kangaroos have their 
own pressing circumstances. And I ask you, what kind of person is it who can blame a kangaroo? 

So we seize the moment. That' s all we can do. Capture the moment in a snapshot. Front and center, 
in a row left to right: you, the kangaroos, me. 

Enough of trying to write this all down. It's going nowhere. Say I write the word "coincidence." 
What you read in the word "coincidence" could be utterly different — even opposite — from what the 
very same word means to me. This is unfair, if I may say so. Here I am, stripped to my underpants, 
while you' ve only undone three buttons of your blouse. An unfair turn of events if there ever was one. 

Hence I bought myself a cassette tape, having decided to directly record my letter to you. 

[Whistling — eight bars of the "Colonel Bogey" marchj 

1 ESTING, can you hear me? 

I dont really know liow you will take to receiving this letter — that is, this tape — I really can't imagine. I 
suppose you might even get quite upset by it all. Why? . . . Because it's highly unusual for a product- 
control clerk of a department store to reply to a customer complaint by cassette tape — with a 
personalized message, too, mind you! You could even, if you were so inclined, say the whole thing 
was downright bizarre. And say, were you to get so upset that you sent this tape back to my boss, my 
standing within the organization would be placed in a terribly delicate balance indeed. 

But if that is what you want to do, please do so. 

If it comes to that, I will not get mad or hold a grudge against you. 

Clear enough? We are on 100% equal terms: I have the right to send you a letter and you have the 
right to threaten my livelihood. 

Isn't that right? 

We're even Stephen. Just remember that. 

V^OME TO THINK OF IT, I forgot to mention that I' m calling this letter The Kangaroo Communiaue. 
I mean, everything needs a name, right? 

Suppose, for instance, you keep a diary. Instead of writing this long-drawn-out entry, "Department- 
store product-control clerk's reply re complaint arrives," you could simply write "Kangaroo 
Communique arrives" and be done with it. And such a catchy name, too, don't you think? The 
Kangaroo Communique: Makes you think of kangaroos bounding off across the vast plains, pouches 
stuffed fUll of mail, doesn't it? 

[Thump, thump, thump (rapping on tabletop)] 

Now for some knocking. 



[Knock, knock, knock] 



Stop me if you've heard this. 

Don't open the door if you don't feel like it. Either way is perfectly fine. If you don't want to listen 
anymore, please stop the tape and throw it away. I just wanted to sit down awhile by your front door 
talking to myself, that's all. I have no idea whatsoever if you're listening or not, but since I don't 
know, it's really all the same whether you do or you don't, isn't it? Ha, ha, ha. 

Okay, what the hell, let's give it a go. 



OTILL AND ALL , this imperfection business is pretty tough going. Who'd have thought talking into a 
microphone without any script or plan would be so hard? It's like standing in the middle of the desert 
sprinkling water around with a cup. No visible sign of anything, not one thing to eling to. 

That's why all this time I've been talking to the VU meters. You know, the VU meters? Those 
gizmos with the needles that twiteh to the volume? I don't know what the V or the U stand for, but 
whatever, they're the only things showing any reaetion to my ranting. 

Hey, hey. 

All the same, their eriteria are really quite simple. 

V and U, well, they're like a vaudeville duo. There's no F without U and no U without V — a nice 
little setup. As far as they're concerned, it really doesn't matter what I babble on about. The only 
thing they're interested in is how much my voice makes the air vibrate. To them, the air vibrates, 
therefore I am. 

Pretty swift, don't you think? 

Watching them, I get to thinking it doesn't matter what I say so long as I keep talking. 
Whoa! 

Come to think of it, not too long ago I saw a movie. It was about a comedian who just couldn't 
make anyone laugh no matter what jokes he told. Got the picture? Not one soul would laugh. 

Well, talking into this microphone, I' m reminded of that movie over and over again. 

It's all very odd. 

The very same lines when spoken by one person will have you dying with laughter but when 
spoken by another won't seem funny in the least. Curious, don't you think? And the more I think about 
it, that difference just seems to be one of these things you're born with. See, it's like the curvature of 
the semicireular canals of your ears having the edge over somebody else's, or . . . you know. 

Sometimes I find myself thinking, If only I had such gifts, how happy I'd be. F m always doubling 
over laughing to myself when something strikes me as funny, but try to tell someone else and it falls 
flat, a dud. It makes me feel like the Egyptian Sandman. Even more, it's ... 

You know about the Egyptian Sandman? 

Hmm, well, you see, the Egyptian Sandman was Prince of Egypt by birth. A long time ago, back in 
the days of pyramids and sphinxes and all that. But because he was so ugly — I mean, truly ugly — the 
king had him sent off into the deepest jungle to get rid of him. Well, it so happens that the kid ends up 
getting raised by wolves, or monkeys, maybe. One of those stories, you know. And somehow or other, 



he becomes a Sandman. Now, this Sandman, everything he touches turns to sand. Breezes turn into 
sandstorms, babbling brooks turn into dunes, grassy plains turn into deserts. So goes the tale of the 
Sandman. Ever hear it before? Probably not, eh? That's because I just made it up. Ha, ha, ha. 

Anyway, talking to you like this, I get the feeling Fve become the Egyptian Sandman myself. And 
whatever I touch, it's sand sand sand. 

Onceagmn, I see Fm talking about myself too much. But all things considered, it's unavoidable. I mean, I 
don't even know one solitary thing about you. Fve got your address and your name, and that's it. Your 
age, income bracket, the shape of your nose, whether you' re slender or overweight, married or not — 
what do I know? Not that any of that really matters. It's almost better this way. If at all possible, I 
prefer to keep things simple, very simple — on the metaphysical level, if you will. 

To wit, here I have your letter. 

This is all I need. 

Just as the zoologist collects shit samples in the jungle from which to deduce the elephant's dietary 
habits and patterns of activity and weight and sex life, so your one letter gives me enough to go on. I 
can actually sense what kind of person you are. Of course, minus your looks, the kind of perfume you 
wear, details like that. Nonetheless — your very essence. 

Your letter was, honestly, quite fascinating. Your choice of words, the handwriting, punctuation, 
spacing between lines, rhetoric — everything was perfect. Superlative it was not. Butperfect, yes. 

Every month, I read over five hundred letters, and frankly, yours was the first letter that ever moved 
me. I secretly took your letter home with me and read it over and over again. Then I analyzed your 
letter thoroughly. Being such a short letter, it was no trouble at all. 

Many things came to light through my analysis. First of all, the number of punctuation marks is 
overwhelming. 6.36 commas for every period. On the high side, don't you think? And that's not all: 
The way you punctuate is markedly irregular. 

Listen, please don't think I'mputting down your writing. Fm simply moved by it. 

Enthralled. 

And it's not just the commas, either. Every part of your letter — down to each ink smear — 
everything set me off, everything shook me. 

Why? 

Well, the long and the short of it is that there's no you in the whole piece of writing. Oh, there's a 
story to it, all right. A giri — a woman — makes a mistake buying a record. She had the feeling the 
record had the wrong tunes, but still, she went ahead and bought it, and it's exactly one week before 
she realizes. The salesgirl won't exchange it. So she writes a letter of complaint. That's the story. 

I had to reread your letter three times before I grasped the story. The reason was, your letter was 
completely different from all the other letters of complaint that come our way. To put it bluntly, there 
wasn't even any complaint in your letter. Let alone any emotion. The only thing that was there . . . was 
the story. 

Really and truly, you had me wondering. Was the letter in fact intended as a complaint or a 
confession or a proclamation, or was it perhaps meant to put forth some thesis? I had no idea. Your 
letter reminded me of a news photo from the scene of a massacre. With no commentary, no article, no 



nothing — just a photo. A shot of dead bodies littering some roadside in some country somewhere. 
Bang, bang, bang . . . there's your massacre. 
No, wait, we can simplify things a little. Simplify them a lot. 
That is to say, your letter excites me sexually. 
There you have it. 

_Letusnow address the topic of sex. 

[Thud, thud, thudj 

MoRE KNOCKiNG. 

You know, if this doesn't interest you, you can stop the tape. Fm just talking to myself, blabbering 
away to the VU meters. Blah, blah, blah. 

Okay? 

Picture this: Short forearms with five fingers, but singularly huge hind legs with four toes, the fourth of 
which is immensely overdeveloped, while the second and third are extra tiny and fused together . . . 
that' s a description of the feet of a kangaroo. Ha, ha, ha. 

Uh , MOVING ON to the topic of sex. 

Ever since I took your letter home with me, all I can seem to think about is sleeping with you. That F 11 
climb into bed to fmd you next to me, wake up in the morning and there you' d be. As I open my eyes 
you'll already be getting out of bed, and Fll hear you zipping up your dress. There I'd be — and you 
know how delicate the zipper on a dress can be — well, I'd just shut my eyes and pretend to be asleep. 
I wouldn't even set eyes on you. 

Once you cut across the room and disappeared into the bathroom, only then would I open my eyes. 
Then I'd get a bite to eat and head out to work. 

In the pitch-black of night — Fll instali special blinds on my windows to make the place extra pitch- 
black — of course, I wouldn't see your face. I'd know nothing, not your age or weight. So I wouldn't 
lay a hand on you, either. 

But, well, that' s fme. 

If you really want to know, it makes no difference whatsoever if I have sex with you or not. . . . 

No, I take that back. 

Let me think that one over. 

Okay, let's put it this way. I would like to sleep with you. But it's all right if I don't sleep with you. 
What Fm saying is, I'd like to be as fair as possible. I don't want to force anything on anybody, any 
more than I'd want anything forced on me. It's enough that I feel your presence or see your commas 
swirling around me. 

I OU SEE, it's like this: 

Sometimes, when I think about entities — like in "separate entities" — it gets mighty grim. I start 



thinking, and I nearly go to pieces. . . . 

For instance, say you're riding on the subway. And there are dozens of people in the car. Mere 
"passengers" you'd have to call them, as a rule. "Passengers" being conveyed from Aoyama One- 
chome to Akasakamitsuke. Sometimes, though, it'll strike you that each and every one of those 
passengers is a distinct individual entity. Like, what does this one do? Or why on earth do you 
suppose that one 's riding the Ginza Line? Or whatever. By then it's too late. You let it get to you and 
you're a goner. 

Looks like that businessman's hairline is receding, or the giri over there 's got such hairy legs I bet 
she shaves at least once a week, or why is that young guy sitting across the aisle wearing that awful 
tie? Little things like that. Until finally you've got the shakes and you want to jump out of the car then 
and there. Why, just the other day — I know you're going to laugh, but — I was on the verge of pressing 
the emergency-brake button by the door. 

I admit it. But that doesn't mean you should go thinking F m hypersensitive or on edge all the time. 
I' m really a regular sort of guy, your everyday ordinary workaday type, gainfully employed in the 
product-control section of a department store. And I've got nothing against the subway. 

Nor do I have any problem sexually. There's a woman F m seeing — I guess you could call her my 
girlfriend — been sleeping with her twice a week for maybe a year now. And she and I, we're both 
pretty satisfled. Only I try not to take her too seriously. I have no intention of marrying her. If I thought 
about getting married, I' m sure I'd begin taking her seriously, and I'd lose all confidence that I could 
carry on from that point. I mean, that's how it is. You live with a giri and these things start to get to 
you — her teeth aren't exactly straight, the shape of her fingernails — how can you expect to go on like 
that? 

Let me say a little more about myself. 
No knocking this time. 

If you've listened this far, you might as well hear me out. 
Just a second. I need a smoke. 

[Rattle, rattle] 

Up to now, I've hardly said a word about myself. Like, there's really not that much to say. And 
even if I did, probably nobody would fmd it terribly interesting. 

So why am I telling you all this? 

I think I already told you, it's because now my sights are set on the Nobility of Imperfection. 
And what touched off this Nobility of Imperfection idea? 
Your letter and four kangaroos. 
Yes, kangaroos. 

Kangaroos are such fascinating creatures, I can look at them for hours on end. What can kangaroos 
possibly have to think about? The whole lot of them, jumping around in their cage all day long, 
digging holes now and again. And then what do they do with these holes? Nothing. They dig them and 
that's it. Ha, ha, ha. 

Kangaroos give birth to only one baby at a time. So as soon as one baby is born, the female gets 



pregnant again. Otherwise the kangaroo population would never sustain itself. This means the female 
kangaroo spends her entire life either pregnant or nursing babies. If she's not pregnant, she's nursing 
babies; if she's not nursing babies, she's pregnant. You could say she exists just to ensure the 
continuance of the species. The kangaroo species wouldn't survive if there weren't any kangaroos, 
and if their purpose wasn't to go on existing, kangaroos wouldn't be around in the first place. 

Funny about that. 

Butimgetting ahead of myself. Excuse me. 
1 O TALK about myself, then. 

Actually, I'm extremely dissatisfied with being who I am. It's nothing to do with my looks or 
abilities or status or any of that. It simply has to do with being me. The situation strikes me as grossly 
unfair. 

Still, that doesn't mean you should write me off as someone with a lot of gripes. I have not one 
complaint about the place where I work or about my salary. The work is undeniably boring, but then, 
most jobs are boring. Money is not a major issue here. 

Shall I put it on the line? 

I want to be able to be in two places at once. That is my one and only wish. Other than that, there's 
not a thing I desire. 

Yet being who and what I am, my singularity hampers this desire of mine. An unhappy lot, don't 
you think? My wish, if anything, is rather unassuming. I don't want to be ruler of the world, nor do I 
want to be an artist of genius. I merely want to exist in two places simultaneously. Got it? Not three, 
not four, only two. I want to be roller-skating while I'm listening to an orchestra at a concert hall. I 
want to be a McDonald's Quarter Pounder and still be a clerk in the product-control section of the 
department store. I want to sleep with you and be sleeping with my girlfriend all the while. I want to 
lead a general existence and yet be a distinct, separate entity. 

Al LOW ME one more cigarette. 
Whoa. 

Getting a little tired. 

I'm not used to this, speaking so frankly about myself. 

There's just one thing I'd like to get clear, though. Which is that I do not lust after you sexually as a 
woman. Like I told you, I am angry at the fact that I am only myself and nothing else. Being a solitary 
entity is dreadfully depressing. Hence I do not seek to sleep with you, a solitary individual. 

If, however, you were to divide into two, and I split into two as well, and we four all shared the 
same bed together, wouldn't that be something! Don't you think? 

Pleasesend no reply If you decide you want to write me a letter, please send it care of the company in the 
form of a complaint. If not a complaint, then whatever you come up with. 

That' s about it. 

I listened to the tape this far on playbackjust now. To be honest, I'm very dissatisfied with it. I feel like 



an aquarium trainer who's let a seal die out of negligence. It made me worry whether I should even 
send you this tape or not, blowing this thing all out of proportion even by my standards. 

And now that Fve decided to send it, F m still worried. 

But what the hell, I'm striving for imperfection, so Fve got to live happily by my choice. It was you 
and the four kangaroos who got me into this imperfection, after all. 

S IGNING OFF. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



O N 

SEEI N G 

The 

1 O o % 
P E R F E C T 

<S I R L 

ONE 
B E AuT I F U L 

A P R IL 

mO R N I N O 



One beautiful april morning, oii a naiTow side street iri Tokyo's fashionable Harajuku neighborhood, I walkpast 
the 100% perfect giri. 

Tell you the truth, she's not that good-looking. She doesn't stand out in any way. Her clothes are 
nothing special. The back of her hair is still bent out of shape from sleep. She isn't young, either — 
must be near thirty, not even close to a "giri," properly speaking. But still, I know from fifty yards 
away: She's the 100% perfect giri for me. The moment I see her, there's a rumbling in my chest, and 
my mouth is as dry as a desert. 

Maybe you have your own particular favorite type of giri — one with slim ankles, say, or big eyes, 
or graceful fingers, or you' re drawn for no good reason to girls who take their time with every meal. I 
have my own preferences, of course. Sometimes in a restaurant I' 11 catch myself staring at the giri at 
the table next to mine because I like the shape of her nose. 

But no one can insist that his 100% perfect giri correspond to some preconceived type. Much as I 
like noses, I can' t recall the shape of hers — or even if she had one. Ali I can remember for sure is that 
she was no great beauty. It's weird. 

"Yesterday on the street I passed the 100% perfect giri," I tell someone. 

"Yeah?" he says. "Good-looking?" 

"Notreally." 

"Your favorite type, then?" 

'T don't know. I can't seem to remember anything about her — the shape of her eyes or the size of 
her breasts." 

"Strange." 

"Yeah. Strange." 

"So anyhow," he says, already bored, "what did you do? Talk to her? Follow her?" 
"Nah. Just passed her on the street." 

She's walking east to west, and I west to east. It's a really nice April morning. 

Wish I could talk to her. Half an hour would be plenty: just ask her about herself, tell her about 
myself, and — what I'd really like to do — explain to her the complexities of fate that have led to our 
passing each other on a side street in Harajuku on a beautiful April morning in 1981. This was 
something sure to be crammed full of warm secrets, like an antique clock built when peace filled the 
world. 

After talking, we'd have lunch somewhere, maybe see a Woody Allen movie, stop by a hotel bar 
for cocktails. With any kind of luck, we might end up in bed. 

Potentiality knocks on the door of my heart. 

Now the distance betweenus has narrowed to fifteen yards. 

How can I approach her? What should I say? 

"Good morning, miss. Do you thinkyou could spare half an hour for a little conversation?" 
Ridiculous. I'd sound like an insurance salesman. 

"Pardon me, but would you happen to know if there is an all-night cleaners in the neighborhood?" 
No, this is just as ridiculous. I'm not carrying any laundry, for one thing. Who's going to buy a line 



like that? 

Maybe the simple truth would do. "Good morning. You are the 100% perfect giri for me." 

No, she wouldn't believe it. Or even if she did, she might not want to talk to me. Sorry, she could 
say, I might be the 100% perfect giri for you, but you' re not the 100% perfect boy for me. It could 
happen. And if I found myself in that situation, I'd probably go to pieces. I'd never recover from the 
shock. I'mthirty-two, and that' s what growing older is all about. 

We pass in front of a flower shop. A small, warm air mass touches my skin. The asphalt is damp, 
and I catch the scent of roses. I can't bring myself to speak to her. She wears a white sweater, and in 
her right hand she holds a crisp white envelope lacking only a stamp. So: She's written somebody a 
letter, maybe spent the whole night writing, to judge from the sleepy look in her eyes. The envelope 
could contain every secret she's ever had. 

I take a few more strides and turn: She's lost in the crowd. 

NoW, OF COURSE , I know exactly what I should have said to her. It would have been a long speech, though, 
far too long for me to have delivered it properly. The ideas I come up with are never very practical. 

Oh, well. It would have started "Once upon a time" and ended "A sad story, don't you think?" 

Once upon aume, there lived a boy and a giri. The boy was eighteen and the giri sixteen. He was not 
unusually handsome, and she was not especially beautiful. They were just an ordinary lonely boy and 
an ordinary lonely giri, like all the others. But they believed with their whole hearts that somewhere 
in the world there lived the 100% perfect boy and the 100% perfect giri for them Yes, they believed 
in a miracle. And that miracle actually happened. 

One day the two came upon each other on the corner of a street. 

"This is amazing," he said. "Fve been looking for you all my life. You may not believe this, but 
you' re the 100% perfect giri for me." 

"And you," she said to him, "are the 100% perfect boy for me, exactly as I'd pictured you in every 
detail. It's like a dream" 

They sat on a park bench, held hands, and told each other their stories hour after hour. They were 
not lonely anymore. They had found and been found by their 100% perfect other. What a wonderful 
thing it is to find and be found by your 100% perfect other. It's a miracle, a cosmic miracle. 

As they sat and talked, however, a tiny, tiny sliver of doubt took root in their hearts: Was it really 
all right for one's dreams to come true so easily? 

And so, when there came a momentary lull in their conversation, the boy said to the giri, "Let's test 
ourselves — just once. If we really are each other 's 100% perfect lovers, then sometime, somewhere, 
we will meet again without fail. And when that happens, and we know that we are the 100% perfect 
ones, we'll marry then and there. What do you think?" 

"Yes," she said, "that is exactly what we should do." 

And so they parted, she to the east, and he to the west. 

The test they had agreed upon, however, was utterly unnecessary. They should never have 
undertaken it, because they really and truly were each other 's 100% perfect lovers, and it was a 
miracle that they had ever met. But it was impossible for them to know this, young as they were. The 
cold, indifferent waves of fate proceeded to toss them unmercifully. 



One winter, both the boy and the giri came down with the season's terrible influenza, and after 
drifting for weeks between life and death they lost all memory of their earlier years. When they 
awoke, their heads were as empty as the young D. H. Lawrence's piggy bank. 

They were two bright, determined young people, however, and through their unremitting efforts 
they were able to acquire once again the knowledge and feeling that qualified them to return as fiill- 
fledged members of society. Heaven be praised, they became truly upstanding citizens who knew how 
to transfer from one subway line to another, who were fully capable of sending a special-delivery 
letter at the post office. Indeed, they even experienced love again, sometimes as much as 75% or even 
85%love. 

Time passed with shocking swiftness, and soon the boy was thirty-two, the giri thirty. 

One beautiful April morning, in search of a cup of coffee to start the day, the boy was walking from 
west to east, while the giri, intending to send a special-delivery letter, was walking from east to west, 
both along the same narrow street in the Harajuku neighborhood of Tokyo. They passed each other in 
the very center of the street. The faintest gleam of their lost memories glimmered for the briefest 
moment in their hearts. Each felt a rumbling in the chest. And they knew: 

She is the 100% perfect giri for me. 

He is the 100% perfect boy for me. 

But the glow of their memories was far too weak, and their thoughts no longer had the clarity of 
fourteen years earlier. Without a word, they passed each other, disappearing into the crowd. Forever. 

A sad story, don't you think? 
Yes, THAT'S it, that is what I should have said to her. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



s L E E P 



1 HISISMY seventeenth straight day without sleep. 

I'm not talking about insomnia. I know what insomnia is. I had something like it in college 
— "something like it" because I'm not sure that what I had then was exactly the same as what people 
refer to as insomnia. I suppose a doctor could have told me. But I didn't see a doctor. I knew it 
wouldn't do any good. Not that I had any reason to think so. Call it woman's intuition — I just felt they 
couldn't help me. So I didn't see a doctor, and I didn't say anything to my parents or friends, because 
I knew that that was exactly what they would tell me to do. 

Back then, my "something like insomnia" went on for a month. I never really got to sleep that entire 
time. I'd go to bed at night and say to myself, "Ali right now, time for some sleep." That was all it 
took to wake me up. It was instantaneous — like a conditioned reflex. The harder I worked at sleeping, 
the wider awake I became. I tried alcohol, I tried sleeping pills, but they had absolutely no effect. 

Finally, as the sky began to grow light in the morning, I'd feel that I might be drifting off. But that 
wasn't sleep. My fmgertips were just barely brushing against the outermost edge of sleep. And all the 
while, my mind was wide awake. I would feel a hint of drowsiness, but my mind was there, in its 
own room, on the other side of a transparent wali, watching me. My physical self was drifting through 
the feeble morning light, and all the while it could feel my mind staring, breathing, close beside it. I 
was both a body on the verge of sleep and a mind determined to stay awake. 

This incomplete drowsiness would continue on and off all day. My head was always foggy. I 
couldn't get an accurate fix on the things around me — their distance or mass or texture. The 
drowsiness would overtake me at regular, wavelike intervals: on the subway, in the classroom, at the 
dinner table. My mind would slip away from my body. The world would sway soundlessly I would 
drop things. My pencil or my purse or my fork would clatter to the floor. All I wanted was to throw 
myself down and sleep. But I couldn't. The wakefulness was always there beside me. I could feel its 
chilling shadow. It was the shadow of myself. Weird, I would think as the drowsiness overtook me, 
I'm in my own shadow. I would walk and eat and talk to people inside my drowsiness. And the 
strangest thing was that no one noticed. I lost fifteen pounds that month, and no one noticed. No one in 
my family, not one of my friends or classmates, realized that I was going through life asleep. 

It was literally true: I was going through life asleep. My body had no more feeling than a drowned 
corpse. My very existence, my life in the world, seemed like a hallucination. A strong wind would 
make me think that my body was about to be blown to the end of the earth, to some land I had never 
seen or heard of, where my mind and body would separate forever. Hold tight, I would tell myself, 
but there was nothing for me to hold on to. 

And then, when night came, the intense wakefulness would return. I was powerless to resist it. I 
was locked in its core by an enormous force. All I could do was stay awake until morning, eyes wide 
open in the dark. I couldn't even think. As I lay there, listening to the clock tick off the seconds, I did 
nothing but stare at the darkness as it slowly deepened and slowly diminished. 

And then one day it ended, without warning, without any external cause. I started to lose 
consciousness at the breakfast table. I stood up without saying anything. I may have knocked 
something off the table. I think someone spoke to me. But I can't be sure. I staggered to my room, 
crawled into bed in my clothes, and fell fast asleep. I stayed that way for twenty-seven hours. My 
mother became alarmed and tried to shake me out of it. She actually slapped my cheeks. But I went on 
sleeping for twenty-seven hours without a break. And when I finally did awaken, I was my old self 
again. Probably. 



I have no idea why I became an insomniac then or why the condition suddenly cured itself. It was 
like a thick, black cloud brought from somewhere by the wind, a cloud crammed flill of ominous 
things I have no knowledge of. No one knows where such a thing comes from or where it goes. I can 
only be sure that it did descend on me for a time, and then departed. 

Inanycase, what I have now is nothing like that insomnia, nothing at all. I just can't sleep. Not for one 
second. Aside from that simple fact, Fmperfectly normal. I don't feel sleepy, and my mind is as clear 
as ever. Clearer, if anything. Physically, too, I'm normal: My appetite is fine; F m not fatigued. In 
terms of everyday reality, there's nothing wrong with me. I just can't sleep. 

Neither my husband nor my son has noticed that F m not sleeping. And I haven't mentioned it to 
them. I don't want to be told to see a doctor. I know it wouldn't do any good. I just know. Like before. 
This is something I have to deal with myself. 

So they don't suspect a thing. On the surface, our life flows on unchanged. Peaceful. Routine. After 
I see my husband and son off in the morning, I take my car and go marketing. My husband is a dentist. 
His office is a ten-minute drive from our condo. He and a dental-school friend own it as partners. 
That way, they can afford to hire a technician and a receptionist. One partner can take the other's 
overflow. Both of them are good, so for an office that has been in operation for only five years and 
that opened without any special connections, the place is doing very well. Almost too well. "I didn't 
want to work so hard," says my husband. "But I can't complain." 

And I always say, "Really, you can't." It's true. We had to get an enormous bank loan to open the 
place. A dental office requires a huge investment in equipment. And the competition is fierce. Patients 
don't start pouring in the minute you open your doors. Lots of dental clinics have failed for lack of 
patients. 

Back then, we were young and poor and we had a brand-new baby No one could guarantee that we 
would survive in such a tough world. But we have survived, one way or another. Five years. No, we 
really can't complain. We' ve still got almost two thirds of our debt left to pay back, though. 

"I know why you've got so many patients," I always say to him. "It's because you' re such a good- 
looking guy." 

This is our little joke. He's not good-looking at all. Actually, he's kind of strange-looking. Even 
now I sometimes wonder why I married such a strange-looking man. I had other boyfriends who were 
far more handsome. 

What makes his face so strange? I can't really say. It's not a handsome face, but it's not ugly, either. 
Nor is it the kind that people would say has "character." Honestly, "strange" is about all that fits. Or 
maybe it would be more accurate to say that it has no distinguishing features. Still, there must be some 
element that makes his face have no distinguishing features, and if I could grasp whatever that is, I 
might be able to understand the strangeness of the whole. I once tried to draw his picture, but I 
couldn't do it. I couldn't remember what he looked like. I sat there holding the pencil over the paper 
and couldn't make a mark. I was flabbergasted. How can you live with a man so long and not be able 
to bring his face to mind? I knew how to recognize him, of course. I would even get mental images of 
him now and then. But when it came to drawing his picture, I realized that I didn't remember anything 
about his face. What could I do? It was like running into an invisible wali. The one thing I could 
remember was that his face looked strange. 

The memory of that often makes me nervous. 



Still, he's one of those men everybody likes. That's a big plus in his business, obviously, but I think 
he would have been a success at just about anything. People feel secure talking to him. I had never 
met anyone like that before. Ali my women friends like him. And I' m fond of him, of course. I think I 
even love him. But strictly speaking, I don't actually like him 

Anyhow, he smiles in this natural, innocent way, just like a child. Not many grown-up men can do 
that. And I guess you'd expect a dentist to have nice teeth, which he does. 

"It's not my fault I'm so good-looking," he always answers when we enjoy our little joke. We're 
the only ones who understand what it means. It's a recognition of reality — of the fact that we have 
managed in one way or another to survive — and it's an important ritual for us. 

Hedmves his Sentra out of the condo parking garage every morning at 8: 15. Our son is in the seat next to 
him. The elementary school is on the way to the office. "Be careful," I say. "Don't worry," he 
answers. Always the same little dialogue. I can't help myself. I have to say it. "Be careful." And my 
husband has to answer, "Don't worry." He starts the engine, puts a Haydn or a Mozart tape into the 
car stereo, and hums along with the music. My two "men" always wave to me on the way out. Their 
hands move in exactly the same way. It's almost uncanny. They lean their heads at exactly the same 
angle and turn their palms toward me, moving them slightly from side to side in exactly the same way, 
as if they' d been trained by a choreographer. 

I have my own car, a used Honda Civic. A girlfriend sold it to me two years ago for next to 
nothing. One bumper is smashed in, and the body style is old-fashioned, with rust spots showing up. 
The odometer has over 150,000 kilometers on it. Sometimes — once or twice a montli — the car is 
almost impossible to start. The engine simply won't catch. Still, it's not bad enough to have the thing 
fixed. If you baby it and let it rest for ten minutes or so, the engine will start up with a nice, solid 
vroom. Oh, well, everything — everybody — gets out of whack once or twice a month. That's life. My 
husband calls my car "your donkey." I don't care. It's mine. 

I drive my Civic to the supermarket. After marketing, I clean the house and do the laundry. Then I 
fix lunch. I make a point of performing my morning chores with brisk, efficient movements. If 
possible, I like to finish my dinner preparations in the morning, too. Then the afternoon is all mine. 

My husband comes home for lunch. He doesn't like to eat out. He says the restaurants are too 
crowded, the food is no good, and the smell of tobacco smoke gets into his clothes. He prefers eating 
at home, even with the extra travel time involved. Still, I don't make anything fancy for lunch. I warm 
up leftovers in the microwave or boil a pot of noodles. So the actual time involved is minimal. And of 
course it's more fun to eat with my husband than all alone with no one to talk to. 

Before, when the clinic was just getting started, there would often be no patient in the first 
afternoon slot, so the two of us would go to bed after lunch. Those were the loveliest times with him. 
Everything was hushed, and the soft afternoon sunshine would filter into the room. We were a lot 
younger then, and happier. 

We're still happy, of course. I really do think so. No domestic troubles cast shadows on our home. 
I love him and trust him. And I'm sure he feels the same about me. But little by little, as the months 
and years go by, your life changes. That's just how it is. There's nothing you can do about it. Now all 
the afternoon slots are taken. When we finish eating, my husband brushes his teeth, hurries out to his 
car, and goes back to the office. He's got all those sick teeth waiting for him. But that's all right. We 
both know you can't have everything your own way. 



After my husband goes back to the ofifice, I take a bathing suit and towel and drive to the 
neighborhood athletic club. I swim for half an hour. I swim hard. F m not that crazy about the 
swimming itself: I just want to keep the flab off. Fve always liked my own figure. Actually, I've 
never liked my face. It's not bad, but Fve never really liked it. My body is another matter. I like to 
stand naked in front of the mirror. I like to study the soft outlines I see there, the balanced vitality. F m 
not sure what it is, but I get the feeling that something inside there is very important to me. Whatever it 
is, I don't want to lose it. 

Fm thirty. When you reach thirty, you realize it's not the end of the world. Fm not especially happy 
about getting older, but it does make some things easier. It's a question of attitude. One thing I know 
for sure, though: If a thirty-year-old woman loves her body and is serious about keeping it looking the 
way it should, she has to put in a certain amount of effort. I learned that from my mother. She used to 
be a slim, lovely woman, but not anymore. I don't want the same thing to happen to me. 

After I've had my swim, I use the rest of my afternoon in various ways. Sometimes I' 11 wander 
over to the station plaza and window-shop. Sometimes I' 11 go home, curi up on the sofa, and read a 
book or listen to the FM station or just rest. Eventually, my son comes home from school. I help him 
change into his playclothes, and give him a snack. When he's through eating, he goes out to play with 
his friends. He's too young to go to an afternoon eram school, and we aren't making him take piano 
lessons or anything. "Let him play," says my husband. "Let him grow up naturally." When my son 
leaves the house, I have the same little dialogue with him as I do with my husband. "Be careful," I 
say, and he answers, "Don't worry." 

As evening approaches, I begin preparing dinner. My son is always back by six. He watehes 
cartoons on TV If no emergeney patients show up, my husband is home before seven. He doesn't 
drink a drop and he's not fond of pointless socializing. He almost always comes straight home from 
work. 

The three of us talk during dinner, mostly about what we've done that day. My son always has the 
most to say. Everything that happens in his life is fresh and full of mystery. He talks, and we offer our 
comments. After dinner, he does what he likes — watehes television or reads or plays some kind of 
game with my husband. When he has homework, he shuts himself up in his room and does it. He goes 
to bed at 8:30. 1 tuek him in and stroke his hair and say good night to him and turn off the light. 

Then it's husband and wife together. He sits on the sofa, reading the newspaper and talking to me 
now and then about his patients or something in the paper. Then he listens to Haydn or Mozart. I don't 
mind listening to music, but I can never seem to tell the difTerence between those two composers. 
They sound the same to me. When I say that to my husband, he tells me it doesn't matter. "It's all 
beautiful. That' s what counts." 

"Just like you," I say. 

"Just like me," he answers with a big smile. He seems genuinely pleased. 

OO THAT'S MY LIFE or my life before I stopped sleeping — each day pretty much a repetition of the one 

before. I used to keep a diary, but if I forgot for two or three days, I'd lose traek of what had 
happened on which day. Yesterday could have been the day before yesterday, or vice versa. I'd 
sometimes wonder what kind of life this was. Which is not to say that I found it empty. I was — very 
simply — amazed. At the lack of demarcation between the days. At the faet that I was part of such a 
life, a life that had swallowed me up so completely. At the faet that my footprints were being blown 



away before I even had a chance to turn and look at them. 

Whenever I felt like that, I would look at my face in the bathroom mirror — just look at it for fifteen 
minutes at a time, my mind a total blank. I'd stare at my face purely as a physical object, and 
gradually it would disconnect from the rest of me, becoming just some thing that happened to exist at 
the same time as myself. And a realization would come to me: This is happening here and now. It's 
got nothing to do with footprints. Reality and I exist simultaneously at this present moment. That's the 
most important thing. 

But now I can't sleep anymore. When I stopped sleeping, I stopped keeping a diary. 

I remember with perfect clarity that first night I lost the ability to sleep. I was having a repulsive dream — 
a dark, slimy dream. I don't remember what it was about, but I do remember how it felt: ominous and 
terrifying. I woke at the climactic moment — came fully awake with a start, as if something had 
dragged me back at the last moment from a fatal turning point. Had I remained immersed in the dream 
for another second, I would have been lost forever. After I awoke, my breath came in painful gasps 
for a time. My arms and legs felt paralyzed. I lay there immobilized, listening to my own labored 
breathing, as if I were stretched out flill-length on the floor of a huge cavern. 

"It was a dream," I told myself, and I waited for my breathing to calm down. Lying stiff on my 
back, I felt my heart working violently, my lungs hurrying the blood to it with big, slow, bellowslike 
contractions. I began to wonder what time it could be. I wanted to look at the clock by my pillow, but 
I couldn't turn my head far enough. Just then, I seemed to catch a glimpse of something at the foot of 
the bed, something like a vague, black shadow. I caught my breath. My heart, my lungs, everything 
inside me, seemed to freeze in that instant. I strained to see the black shadow. 

The moment I tried to focus on it, the shadow began to assume a defmite shape, as if it had been 
waiting for me to notice it. Its outline became distinct, and began to be filled with substance, and then 
with details. It was a gaunt old man wearing a skintight black shirt. His hair was gray and short, his 
cheeks sunken. He stood at my feet, perfectly sti.ll. He said nothing, but his piercing eyes stared at me. 
They were huge eyes, and I could see the red network of veins in them. The old man's face wore no 
expression at all. It told me nothing. It was like an opening in the darkness. 

This was no longer the dream, I knew. From that I had already awakened. And not just by drifting 
awake, but by having my eyes ripped open. No, this was no dream. This was reality. And in reality an 
old man I had never seen before was standing at the foot of my bed. I had to do something — turn on 
the light, wake my husband, scream. I tried to move. I fought to make my limbs work, but it did no 
good. I couldn't move a fmger. When it became clear to me that I would never be able to move, I was 
filled with a hopeless terror, a primal fear such as I had never experienced before, like a chill that 
rises silently from the bottomless well of memory. I tried to scream, but I was incapable of producing 
a sound or even moving my tongue. All I could do was look at the old man. 

Now I saw that he was holding something — a tali, narrow, rounded thing that shone white. As I 
stared at this object, wondering what it could be, it began to take on a defmite shape, just as the 
shadow had earlier. It was a pitcher, an old-fashioned porcelain pitcher. After some time, the man 
raised the pitcher and began pouring water from it onto my feet. I could not feel the water. I could see 
it and hear it splashing down onto my feet, but I couldn't feel a thing. 

The old man went on and on pouring water over my feet. Strange — no matter how much he poured, 
the pitcher never ran dry I began to worry that my feet would eventually rot and melt away. Yes, of 



course they would rot. What else could they do with so much water pouring over them? When it 
occurred to me that my feet were going to rot and melt away, I couldn't take it any longer. 

I closed my eyes and let out a scream so loud it took every ounce of strength I had. But it never left 
my body. It reverberated soundlessly inside, tearing through me, shutting down my heart. Everything 
inside my head turned white for a moment as the scream penetrated my every cell. Something inside 
me died. Something melted away, leaving only a shuddering vacuum. An explosive flash incinerated 
everything my existence depended on. 

When I opened my eyes, the old man was gone. The pitcher was gone. The bedspread was dry, and 
there was no indication that anything near my feet had been wet. My body, though, was soaked with 
sweat, a horrifying volume of sweat, more sweat than I ever imagined a human being could produce. 
And yet, undeniably, it was sweat that had come from me. 

I moved one flnger. Then another, and another, and the rest. Next, I bent my arms and then my legs. I 
rotated my feet and bent my knees. Nothing moved quite as it should have, but at least it did move. 
After carefully checking to see that all my body parts were working, I eased myself into a sitting 
position. In the dim light filtering in from the streetlamp, I scanned the entire room from corner to 
corner. The old man was definitely not there. 

The clock by my pillow said 12:30. I had been sleeping for only an hour and a half. My husband 
was sound asleep in his bed. Even his breathing was inaudible. He always sleeps like that, as if all 
mental activity in him had been obliterated. Almost nothing can wake him. 

I got out of bed and went into the bathroom. I threw my sweat- soaked nightgown into the washing 
machine and took a shower. After putting on a fresh pair of pajamas, I went to the living room, 
switched on the floor lamp beside the sofa, and sat there drinking a full glass of brandy. I almost 
never drink. Not that I have a physical incompatibility with alcohol, as my husband does. In fact, I 
used to drink quite a lot, but after marrying him I simply stopped. Sometimes when I had trouble 
sleeping I would take a sip of brandy, but that night I felt I wanted a whole glass to quiet my 
overwrought nerves. 

The only alcohol in the house was a bottle of Remy Martin we kept in the sideboard. It had been a 
gift. I don't even remember who gave it to us, it was so long ago. The bottle wore a thin layer of dust. 
We had no real brandy glasses, so I just poured it into a regular tumbler and sipped it slowly. 

I must have been in a trance, I thought. I had never experienced such a thing, but I had heard about 
trances from a college friend who had been through one. Everything was incredibly clear, she had 
said. You can't believe it's a dream. 'T didn't believe it was a dream when it was happening, and 
now I still don't believe it was a dream." Which is exactly how I felt. Of course it had to be a dream 
— a kind of dream that doesn't feel like a dream 

Though the terror was leaving me, the trembling of my body would not stop. It was in my skin, like 
the circular ripples on water after an earthquake. I could see the slight quivering. The scream had 
done it. That scream that had never found a voice was still locked up in my body, making it tremble. 

I closed my eyes and swallowed another mouthflil of brandy. The warmth spread from my throat to 
my stomach. The sensation felt tremendously real. 

With a start, I thought of my son. Again my heart began pounding. I hurried from the sofa to his 
room He was sound asleep, one hand across his mouth, the other thrust out to the side, looking just as 
secure and peaceful in sleep as my husband. I straightened his blanket. Whatever it was that had so 



violently shattered my sleep, it had attacked only me. Neither of them had felt a thing. 

I returned to the living room and wandered about there. I was not the least bit sleepy. 

I considered drinking another glass of brandy. In fact, I wanted to drink even more alcohol than 
that. I wanted to warm my body more, to calm my nerves down more, and to feel that strong, 
penetrating bouquet in my mouth again. After some hesitation, I decided against it. I didn't want to 
start the new day drunk. I put the brandy back in the sideboard, brought the glass to the kitchen sink 
and washed it. I found some strawberries in the refrigerator and ate them. 

I realized that the trembling in my skin was almost gone. 

What was that old man in black? I asked myself. I had never seen him before in my life. That black 
clothing of his was so strange, like a tight-fitting sweat suit, and yet, at the same time, old-fashioned. I 
had never seen anything like it. And those eyes — bloodshot, and never blinking. Who was he? Why 
did he pour water onto my feet? Why did he have to do such a thing? 

I had only questions, no answers. 

The time my friend went into a trance, she was spending the night at her fiance's house. As she lay 
in bed asleep, an angry-looking man in his early fifties approached and ordered her out of the house. 
While that was happening, she couldn't move a muscle. And, like me, she became soaked with sweat. 
She was certain it must be the ghost of her fiance's father, who was telling her to get out of his house. 
But when she asked to see a photograph of the father the next day, it turned out to be an entirely 
different man. 'T must have been feeling tense," she concluded. "That' s what caused it." 

But I 'm not tense. And this is my own house. There shouldn't be anything here to threaten me. Why 
did I have to go into a trance? 

I shook my head. Stop thinking, I told myself. It won't do any good. I had a realistic dream, nothing 
more. Fve probably been building up some kind of fatigue. The tennis I played the day before 
yesterday must have done it. I met a friend at the club after my swim and she invited me to play tennis 
and I overdid it a little, that' s all. Sure — my arms and legs felt tired and heavy for a while afterward. 

When I fmished my strawberries, I stretched out on the sofa and tried closing my eyes. 

I wasn't sleepy at all. Oh, great, I thought. I really don't feel like sleeping. 

I thought I'd read a book until I got tired again. I went to the bedroom and picked a novel from the 
bookcase. My husband didn't even twitch when I turned on the light to hunt for it. I choseAnna 
Karenina. I was in the mood for a long Russian novel, and I had read Anna Karenina only once, long 
ago, probably in high school. I remembered just a few things about it: the first line, "All happy 
families resemble one another; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way," and the heroine's 
throwing herself under a train at the end. And that early on there was a hint of the final suicide. 
Wasn't there a scene at a racetrack? Or was that in another novel? 

Whatever. I went back to the sofa and opened the book. How many years had it been since I'd sat 
down and relaxed like this with a book? True, I often spent half an hour or an hour of my private time 
in the afternoon with a book open. But you couldn't really call that reading. I'd always fmd myself 
thinking about other things — my son, or shopping, or the freezer's needing to be fixed, or my having to 
find something to wear to a relative's wedding, or the stomach operation my father had last month. 
That kind of stuff would drift into my mind, and then it would grow and take off in a million different 
directions. After a while I'd notice that the only thing that had gone by was the time, and I had hardly 
turned any pages. 



Without noticing it, I had become accustomed in this way to a life without books. How strange, 
now that I think of it. Reading had been the center of my life when I was young. I had read every book 
in the grade-school library, and almost my entire allowance would go for books. I'd even scrimp on 
lunches to buy books I wanted to read. And this went on into junior high and high school. Nobody 
read as much as I did. I was the third of five children, and both my parents worked, so nobody paid 
much attention to me. I could read alone as much as I liked. I'd always enter the essay contests on 
books so that I could win a gift certificate for more books. And I usually won. In college, I majored in 
English literature and got good grades. My graduation thesis on Katherine Mansfield won top honors, 
and my thesis adviser urged me to apply to graduate school. I wanted to go out into the world, though, 
and I knew that I was no scholar. I just enjoyed reading books. And even if I had wanted to go on 
studying, my family didn't have the financial wherewithal to send me to graduate school. We weren't 
poor by any means, but there were two sisters coming along after me, so once I graduated from 
college I simply had to begin supporting myself. 

When had I really read a book last? And what had it been? I couldn't recall anything. Why did a 
person' s life have to change so completely? Where had the old me gone, the one who used to read a 
book as if possessed by it? What had those days — and that almost abnormally intense passion — meant 
to me? 

Thatnight, I found myself capable of reading Anna Karenina with unbroken concentration. I went on 
turning pages without another thought in mind. In one sitting, I read as far as the scene where Anna and 
Vronsky flrst see each other in the Moscow train station. At that point, I stuck my bookmark in and 
poured myself another glass of brandy. 

Though it hadn't occurred to me before, I couldn't help thinking what an odd novel this was. You 
don't see the heroine, Anna, until Chapter 18. I wondered if it didn't seem unusual to readers in 
Tolstoy's day. What did they do when the book went on and on with a detailed description of the life 
of a minor character named Oblonsky — just sit there, waiting for the beautiful heroine to appear? 
Maybe that was it. Maybe people in those days had lots of time to kill — at least the part of society that 
read novel s. 

Then I noticed how late it was. Three in the morning! And still I wasn't sleepy. 

What should I do? I don't feel sleepy at all, I thought. I could just keep on reading. I'd love to fmd 
out what happens in the story. But I have to sleep. 

I remembered my ordeal with insomnia and how I had gone through each day back then, wrapped in 
a cloud. No, never again. I was still a student in those days. It was still possible for me to get away 
with something like that. But not now, I thought. Now F m a wife. A mother. I have responsibilities. I 
have to make my husband's lunches and take care of my son. 

But even if I get into bed now, I know I won' t be able to sleep a wink. 

I shook my head. 

Let's face it, I'mjust not sleepy, I told myself And I want to read the rest of the book. 

I sighed and stole a glance at the big volume lying on the table. And that was that. I plunged into 
Anna Karenina and kept reading until the sun came up. Anna and Vronsky stared at each other at the 
ball and fell into their doomed love. Anna went to pieces when Vronsky's horse fell at the racetrack 
(so there was a racetrack scene, after all!) and confessed her infidelity to her husband. I was there 
with Vronsky when he spurred his horse over the obstacles. I heard the crowd cheering him on. And I 



was there in the stands watching his horse go down. When the window brightened with the morning 
light, I laid down the book and went to the kitchen for a cup of coffee. My mind was filled with 
scenes from the novel and with a tremendous hunger obliterating any other thoughts. I cut two slices of 
bread, spread them with butter and mustard, and had a cheese sandwich. My hunger pangs were 
almost unbearable. It was rare for me to feel that hungry. I had trouble breathing, I was so hungry. One 
sandwich did hardly anything for me, so I made another one and had another cup of coffee with it. 

1 O MY HUSBAND I said nothing about either my trance or my night without sleep. Not that I was hiding them 
from him It just seemed to me that there was no point in telling him What good would it have done? 
And besides, I had simply missed a night' s sleep. That much happens to everyone now and then. 

I made my husband his usual cup of coffee and gave my son a glass of warm milk. My husband ate 
toast, and my son ate a bowl of cornflakes. My husband skimmed the morning paper, and my son 
hummed a new song he had learned in school. The two of them got into the Sentra and left. "Be 
carefiil," I said to my husband. "Don't worry," he answered. The two of them waved. A typical 
morning. 

After they were gone, I sat on the sofa and thought about how to spend the rest of the day. What 
should I do? What did I have to do? I went to the kitchen to inspect the contents of the refrigerator. I 
could get by without shopping. We had bread, milk, and eggs, and there was meat in the freezer. 
Plenty of vegetables, too. Everything I'd need through tomorrow's lunch. 

I had business at the bank, but it was nothing I absolutely had to take care of immediately. Letting it 
go a day longer wouldn't hurt. 

I went back to the sofa and started reading the rest ofAnna Karenina. Until that reading, I hadn't 
realized how little I remembered of what goes on in the book. I recognized virtually nothing — the 
characters, the scenes, nothing. I might as well have been reading a whole new book. How strange. I 
must have been deeply moved at the time I first read it, but now there was nothing left. Without my 
noticing, the memories of all the shuddering, soaring emotions had slipped away and vanished. 

What, then, of the enormous fund of time I had consumed back then reading books? What had all 
that meant? 

I stopped reading and thought about that for a while. None of it made sense to me, though, and soon 
I even lost track of what I was thinking about. I caught myself staring at the tree that stood outside the 
window. I shook my head and went back to the book. 

Just after the middle of Wume 3, I found a few crumbling flakes of chocolate stuck between the 
pages. I must have been eating chocolate as I read the novel when I was in high school. I used to like 
to eat and read. Come to think of it, I hadn't touched chocolate since my marriage. My husband 
doesn't like me to eat sweets, and we almost never give them to our son. We don't usually keep that 
kind of thing around the house. 

As I looked at the whitened flakes of chocolate from over a decade ago, I felt a tremendous urge to 
have the real thing. I wanted to eat chocolate while reading Anna Karenina, the way I did back then. I 
couldn't bear to be denied it for another moment. Every cell in my body seemed to be panting with 
this hunger for chocolate. 

I slipped a cardigan over my shoulders and took the elevator down. I walked straight to the 
neighborhood candy shop and bought two of the sweetest-looking milk-chocolate bars they had. As 
soon as I left the shop, I tore one open and started eating it while walking home. The luscious taste of 



milk chocolate spread through my mouth. I could feel the sweetness being absorbed directly into 
every part of my body I continued eating in the elevator, steeping myself in the wonderful aroma that 
filled the tiny space. 

Heading straight for the sofa, I started roading Anna Karenina and eating my chocolate. I wasn't the 
least bit sleepy. I felt no physical fatigue, either. I could have gone on reading forever. When I 
fmished the first chocolate bar, I opened the second and ate half of that. About two thirds of the way 
through Volume 3, 1 looked at my watch. Eleven-forty. 

Eleven-forty! 

My husband would be home soon. I closed the book and hurried to the kitchen. I put water in a pot 
and turned on the gas. Then I minced some scallions and took out a handful of buckwheat noodles for 
boiling. While the water was heating, I soaked some dried seaweed, cut it up, and topped it with a 
vinegar dressing. I took a block of tofu from the refrigerator and cut it into cubes. Finally, I went into 
the bathroom and brushed my teeth to get rid of the chocolate smell. 

At almost the exact moment the water came to a boil, my husband walked in. He had finished work 
a little earlier than usual, he said. 

Together, we ate the buckwheat noodles. My husband talked about a new piece of dental equipment 
he was considering bringing into the office, a machine that would remove plaque frompatients' teeth 
far more thoroughly than anything he had used before, and in less time. Like all such equipment, it was 
quite expensive, but it would pay for itself soon enough. More and more patients were coming in just 
for a cleaning these days. 

"What do you think?" he asked me. 

I didn't want to think about plaque on people's teeth, and I especially didn't want to hear or think 
about it while I was eating. My mind was filled with hazy images of Vronsky falling off his horse. But 
of course I couldn't tell my husband that. He was deadly serious about the equipment. I asked him the 
price and pretended to think about it. "Why not buy it if you need it?" I said. "The money will work 
out one way or another. You wouldn't be spending it for fun, after all." 

"That's true," he said. "I wouldn't be spending it for fun." Then he continued eating his noodles in 
silence. 

Perched on a branch of the tree outside the window, a pair of large birds was chirping. I watched 
them half-consciously. I wasn't sleepy. I wasn't the least bit sleepy. Why not? 

While I cleared the table, my husband sat on the sofa reading the paper. Anna Karenina lay there 
beside him, but he didn't seem to notice. He had no interest in whether I read books. 

After I finished washing the dishes, my husband said, "I've got a nice surprise today. What do you 
think it is?" 

'T don'tknow," I said. 

"My first afternoon patient has canceled. I don't have to be back in the office until one-thirty." He 
smiled. 

I couldn't figure out why this was supposed to be such a nice surprise. I wonder why I couldn't. 

It was only after my husband stood up and drew me toward the bedroom that I realized what he had 
in mind. I wasn't in the mood for it at all. I didn't understand why I should have sex then. All I wanted 
was to get back to my book. I wanted to stretch out alone on the sofa and munch on chocolate while I 



turned the pages ofAnna Karenina. All the time I had been washing the dishes, my only thoughts had 
been of Vronsky and of how an author like Tolstoy managed to control his characters so skillflilly He 
described them with wonderflil precision. But that very precision somehow denied them a kind of 
salvation. And this fmally — 

I closed my eyes and pressed my fingertips to my temple. 

"Fm sorry, Fve had a kind of headache all day. What awful timing." 

I had often had some truly terrible headaches, so he accepted my explanation without a murmur. 
"You'd better lie down and get some rest," he said. "You've been working too hard." 
"It's really not that bad," I said. 

He relaxed on the sofa until one o'clock, listening to music and reading the paper. And he talked 
about dental equipment again. You bought the latest high-tech stuff and it was obsolete in two or three 
years. . .. So then you had to keep replacing everything. ... The only ones who made any money were 
the equipment manufacturers — that kind of talk. I offered a few clucks, but I was hardly listening. 

After my husband went back to the office, I folded the paper and pounded the sofa cushions until 
they were puffed up again. Then I leaned on the windowsill, surveying the room. I couldn't figure out 
what was happening. Why wasn't I sleepy? In the old days, I had done all-nighters any number of 
times, but I had never stayed awake this long. Ordinarily, I would have been sound asleep after so 
many hours or, if not asleep, impossibly tired. But I wasn't the least bit sleepy. My mind was 
perfectly clear. 

I went into the kitchen and warmed up some coffee. I thought, Now what should I do? Of course, I 
wanted to read the rest ofAnna Karenina, but I also wanted to go to the pool for my swim. I decided 
to go swimming. I don't know how to explain this, but I wanted to purge my body of something by 
exercising it to the limit. Purge it — of what? I spent some time wondering about that. Purge it of what? 

I didn't know. 

But this thing, whatever it was, this mistlike something, hung there inside my body like a certain 
kind of potential. I wanted to give it a name, but the word refused to come to mind. Fm terrible at 
fmding the right words for things. Fm sure Tolstoy would have been able to come up with exactly the 
right word. 

Anyhow, I put my swimsuit in my bag and, as always, drove my Civic to the athletic club. There 
were only two other people in the pool — a young man and a middle-aged woman — and I didn't know 
either of them. A bored-looking lifeguard was on duty. 

I changed into my bathing suit, put on my goggles, and swam my usual thirty minutes. But thirty 
minutes wasn't enough. I swam another fifteen minutes, ending with a crawl at maximum speed for 
two full lengths. I was out of breath, but I still felt nothing but energy welling up inside my body. The 
others were staring at me when I left the pool. 

It was still a little before three o'clock, so I drove to the bank and fmished my business there. I 
considered doing some shopping at the supermarket, but I decided instead to head straight for home. 
There, I picked up Anna Karenina where I had left off, eating what was left of the chocolate. When 
my son came home at four o'clock, I gave him a glass of juice and some fruit gelatin that I had made. 
Then I started on dinner. I defrosted some meat from the freezer and cut up some vegetables in 
preparation for stir-frying. I made miso soup and cooked the rice. All of these tasks I took care of 
with tremendous mechanical efficiency. 



I went back to Anna Karenina. 
I was not tired. 

Attenoclock, I got into my bed, pretending that I would be sleeping there near my husband. He fell asleep 
right away, practically the moment the light went out, as if there were some cord connecting the lamp 
with his brain. 

Amazing. People like that are rare. There are far more people who have trouble falling asleep. My 
father was one of those. He'd always complain about how shallow his sleep was. Not only did he 
fmd it hard to get to sleep, but the slightest sound or movement would wake him up for the rest of the 
night. 

Not my husband, though. Once he was asleep, nothing could wake him until morning. We were still 
newlyweds when it struck me how odd this was. I even experimented to see what it would take to 
wake him. I sprinkled water on his face and tickled his nose with a brush — that kind of thing. I never 
once got him to wake up. If I kept at it, I could get him to groan once, but that was all. And he never 
dreamed. At least he never remembered what his dreams were about. Needless to say, he never went 
into any paralytic trances. He slept. He slept like a turtle buried in mud. 

Amazing. But it helped with what quickly became my nightly routine. 

After ten minutes of lying near him, I would get out of bed. I would go to the living room, turn on 
the floor lamp, and pour myself a glass of brandy. Then I would sit on the sofa and read my book, 
taking tiny sips of brandy and letting the smooth liquid glide over my tongue. Whenever I felt like it, I 
would eat a cookie or a piece of chocolate that I had hidden in the sideboard. After a while, morning 
would come. When that happened, I would close my book and make myself a cup of coffee. Then I 
would make a sandwich and eat it. 

My days became just as regulated. 

I would hurry through my housework and spend the rest of the morning reading. Just before noon, I 
would put my book down and fix my husband's lunch. When he left, before one, I'd drive to the club 
and have my swim I would swim for a full hour. Once I stopped sleeping, thirty minutes was never 
enough. While I was in the water, I concentrated my entire mind on swimming. I thought about nothing 
but how to move my body most effectively, and I inhaled and exhaled with perfect regularity. If I met 
someone I knew, I hardly said a word — just the basic civilities. I refused all invitations. "Sorry," I'd 
say. "I'm going straight home today. There's something I have to do." I didn't want to get involved 
with anybody. I didn't want to have to waste time on endless gossiping. When I was through 
swimming as hard as I could, all I wanted was to hurry home and read. 

I went through the motions — shopping, cooking, playing with my son, having sex with my husband. 
It was easy once I got the hang of it. All I had to do was break the connection between my mind and 
my body. While my body went about its business, my mind floated in its own inner space. I ran the 
house without a thought in my head, feeding snacks to my son, chatting with my husband. 

After I gave up sleeping, it occurred to me what a simple thing reality is, how easy it is to make it 
work. It's just reality. Just housework. Just a home. Like running a simple machine. Once you learn to 
run it, it's just a matter of repetition. You push this button and puli that lever. You adjust a gauge, put 
on the lid, set the timer. The same thing, over and over. 

Of course, there were variations now and then. My mother-in-law had dinner with us. On Sunday, 



the three of us went to the zoo. My son had a terrible case of diarrhea. 

But none of these events had any effect on my being. They swept past me like a silent breeze. I 
chatted with my mother-in-law, made dinner for four, took a picture in front of the bear cage, put a 
hot-water bottle on my son' s stomach and gave himhis medicine. 

No one noticed that I had changed — that I had given up sleeping entirely, that I was spending all my 
time reading, that my mind was someplace a hundred years — and hundreds of miles — from reality. No 
matter how mechanically I worked, no matter how little love or emotion I invested in my handling of 
reality, my husband and my son and my mother-in-law went on relating to me as they always had. If 
anything, they seemed more at ease with me than before. 

And so a week went by. 

Once my constant wakefiilness entered its second week, though, it started to worry me. It was 
simply not normal. People are supposed to sleep. All people sleep. Once, some years ago, I had read 
about a form of torture in which the victim is prevented from sleeping. Something the Nazis did, I 
think. They' d lock the person in a tiny room, fasten his eyelids open, and keep shining lights in his 
face and making loud noises without a break. Eventually, the person would go mad and die. 

I couldn't recall how long the article said it took for the madness to set in, but it couldn't have been 
much more than three or four days. In my case, a whole week had gone by. This was simply too much. 
Still, my health was not suffering. Far from it. I had more energy than ever. 

One day, after showering, I stood naked in front of the mirror. I was amazed to discover that my 
body appeared to be almost bursting with vitality. I studied every inch of myself, head to toe, but I 
could fmd not the slightest hint of excess flesh, not one wrinkle. I no longer had the body of a young 
giri, of course, but my skin had far more glow, far more tautness, than it had before. I took a pinch of 
flesh near my waist and found it almost hard, with a wonderful elasticity. 

It dawned on me that I was prettier than I had realized. I looked so much younger than before that it 
was almost shocking. I could probably pass for twenty-four. My skin was smooth. My eyes were 
bright, lips moist. The shadowed area beneath my protruding cheekbones (the one feature I really 
hated about myself) was no longer noticeable — at all. I sat down and looked at my face in the mirror 
for a good thirty minutes. I studied it from all angles, objectively. No, I had not been mistaken: I was 
really pretty. 

What was happening to me? 

I thought about seeing a doctor. 

I had a doctor who had been taking care of me since I was a child and to whom I felt close, but the 
more I thought about how he might react to my story the less inclined I felt to tell it to him Would he 
take me at my word? He'd probably think I was crazy if I said I hadn't slept in a week. Or he might 
dismiss it as a kind of neurotic insomnia. But if he did believe I was telling the truth, he might send 
me to some big research hospital for testing. 

And then what would happen? 

I'd be locked up and sent from one lab to another to be experimented on. They' d do EEGs and 
EKGs and urinalyses and blood tests and psychological screening and who knows what else. 

I couldn't take that. I just wanted to stay by myself and quietly read my book. I wanted to have my 
hour of swimming every day. I wanted my freedom: That' s what I wanted more than anything. I didn't 
want to go to any hospitals. And, even if they did get me into a hospital, what would they fmd? They' d 



do a mountain of tests and formulate a mountain of hypotheses, and that would be the end of it. I didn't 
want to be locked up in a place like that. 

One afternoon, I went to the library and read some books on sleep. The few books I could find 
didn't tell me much. In fact, they all had only one thing to say: that sleep is rest. Like turning off a car 
engine. If you keep a motor running constantly, sooner or later it will break down. A running engine 
must produce heat, and the accumulated heat fatigues the machinery itself. Which is why you have to 
let the engine rest. Cool down. Turning off the engine — that, fmally, is what sleep is. In a human 
being, sleep provides rest for both the flesh and the spirit. When a person lies down and rests her 
muscles, she simultaneously closes her eyes and cuts off the thought process. And excess thoughts 
release an electrical discharge in the form of dreams. 

One book did have a fascinating point to make. The author maintained that human beings, by their 
very nature, are incapable of escaping from certain fixed idiosyncratic tendencies, both in their 
thought processes and in their physical movements. People unconsciously fashion their own action- 
and thought-tendencies, which under normal circumstances never disappear. In other words, people 
live in the prison cells of their own tendencies. What modulates these tendencies and keeps them in 
check — so the organism doesn't wear down as the heel of a shoe does, at a particular angle, as the 
author puts it — is nothing other than sleep. Sleep therapeutically counteracts the tendencies. In sleep, 
people naturally relax muscles that have been consistently used in only one direction; sleep both 
calms and provides a discharge for thought circuits that have likewise been used in only one 
direction. This is how people are cooled down. Sleeping is an act that has been programmed, with 
karmic inevitability, into the human system, and no one can diverge from it. If a person were to 
diverge from it, the person' s very "ground of being" would be threatened. 

"Tendencies?" I asked myself. 

The only "tendency" of mine that I could think of was housework — those chores I perform day after 
day like an unfeeling machine. Cooking and shopping and laundry and mothering: What were they if 
not "tendencies"? I could do them with my eyes closed. Push the buttons. Puli the levers. Pretty soon, 
realityjust flows off and away. The same physical movements over and over. Tendencies. They were 
consuming me, wearing me down on one side like the heel of a shoe. I needed sleep every day to 
adjust them and cool me down. 

Was that it? 

I read the passage once more, with intense concentration. And I nodded. Yes, almost certainly, that 
was it. 

So, then, what was this life of mine? I was being consumed by my tendencies and then sleeping to 
repair the damage. My life was nothing but a repetition of this cycle. It was going nowhere. 

Sitting at the library table, I shook my head. 

I' m through with sleep! So what if I go mad? So what if I lose my "ground of being"? I will not be 
consumed by my "tendencies." If sleep is nothing more than a periodic repairing of the parts of me 
that are being worn away, I don't want it anymore. I don't need it anymore. My flesh may have to be 
consumed, but my mind belongs to me. F m keeping it for myself. I will not hand it over to anyone. I 
don't want to be "repaired." I will not sleep. 

I left the library filled with a new determination. 



Now my inability to sleep ceased to frighten me. What was there to be afraid of? Think of the advantages! 
Now the hours from ten at night to six in the morning belonged to me alone. Until now, a third of every 
day had been used up by sleep. But no more. No more. Now it was mine, just mine, nobody else's, all 
mine. I could use this time in any way I liked. No one would get in my way. No one would make 
demands on me. Yes, that was it. I had expanded my life. I had increased it by a third. 

You are probably going to tell me that this is biologically abnormal. And you may be right. And 
maybe someday in the future F 11 have to pay back the debt F m building up by continuing to do this 
biologically abnormal thing. Maybe life will try to collect on the expanded part — this "advance" it is 
paying me now. This is a groundless hypothesis, but there is no ground for negating it, and it feels 
right to me somehow. Which means that in the end, the balance sheet of borrowed time will even out. 

Honestly, though, I didn't give a damn, even if I had to die young. The best thing to do with a 
hypothesis is to let it run any course it pleases. Now, at least, I was expanding my life, and it was 
wonderful. My hands weren't empty anymore. Here I was — alive, and I could feel it. It was real. I 
wasn't being consumed any longer. Or at least there was a part of me in existence that was not being 
consumed, and that was what gave me this intensely real feeling of being alive. A life without that 
feeling night go on forever, but it would have no meaning at all. I saw that with absolute clarity now. 

After checking to see that my husband was asleep, I would go sit on the living-room sofa, drink 
brandy by myself, and open my book. I read Anna Karenina three times. Each time, I made new 
discoveries. This enormous novel was full of revelations and riddles. Like a Chinese box, the world 
of the novel contained smaller worlds, and inside those were yet smaller worlds. Together, these 
worlds made up a single universe, and the universe waited there in the book to be discovered by the 
reader. The old me had been able to understand only the tiniest fragment of it, but the gaze of this new 
me could penetrate to the core with perfect understanding. I knew exactly what the great Tolstoy 
wanted to say, what he wanted the reader to get from his book; I could see how his message had 
organically crystallized as a novel, and what in that novel had surpassed the author himself. 

No matter how hard I concentrated, I never tired. After reading Anna Karenina as many times as I 
could, I read Dostoyevski. I could read book after book with utter concentration and never tire. I 
could understand the most difficult passages without effort. And I responded with deep emotion. 

I felt that I had always been meant to be like this. By abandoning sleep I had expanded myself. The 
power to concentrate was the most important thing. Living without this power would be like opening 
one 's eyes without seeing anything. 

Eventually, my bottle of brandy ran out. I had drunk almost all of it by myself. I went to the gourmet 
department of a big store for another bottle of Remy Martin. As long as I was there, I figured, I might 
as well buy a bottle of red wine, too. And a fine crystal brandy glass. And chocolate and cookies. 

Sometimes while reading I would become overexcited. When that happened, I would put my book 
down and exercise — do calisthenics or just walk around the room. Depending on my mood, I might go 
out for a nighttime drive. I'd change clothes, get into my Civic, and drive aimlessly around the 
neighborhood. Sometimes I'd drop into an all-night fast-food place for a cup of coffee, but it was such 
a bother to have to deal with other people that I'd usually stay in the car. I'd stop in some safe- 
looking spot and just let my mind wander. Or I'd go all the way to the harbor and watch the boats. 

One time, though, I was questioned by a policeman. It was two-thirty in the morning, and I was 



parked under a streetlamp near the pier, listening to the car stereo and watching the lights of the ships 
passing by. He knocked on my window. I lowered the glass. He was young and handsome, and very 
polite. I explained to him that I couldn't sleep. He asked for my license and studied it for a while. 
"There was a murder here last month," he said. "Three young men attacked a couple. They killed the 
man and raped the woman." I remembered having read about the incident. I nodded. "If you don't 
have any business here, ma'am, you' d better not hang around here at night." I thanked him and said I 
would leave. He gave me my license back. I drove away. 

That was the only time anyone talked to me. Usually, I would drift through the streets at night for an 
hour or more and no one would bother me. Then I would park in our underground garage. Right next 
to my husband's white Sentra; he was upstairs sleeping soundly in the darkness. I'd listen to the 
crackle of the hot engine cooling down, and when the sound died I'd go upstairs. 

The first thing I would do when I got inside was check to make sure my husband was asleep. And 
he always was. Then I'd check my son, who was always sound asleep, too. They didn't know a thing. 
They believed that the world was as it had always been, unchanging. But they were wrong. It was 
changing in ways they could never guess. Changing a lot. Changing fast. It would never be the same 
again. 

One time, I stood and stared at my sleeping husband's face. I had heard a thump in the bedroom and 
rushed in. The alarm clock was on the floor. He had probably knocked it down in his sleep. But he 
was sleeping as soundly as ever, completely unaware of what he had done. What would it take to 
wake this man? I picked up the clock and put it back on the night table. Then I folded my arms and 
stared at my husband. How long had it been — years? — since the last time I had studied his face as he 
slept? 

I had done it a lot when we were first married. That was all it took to relax me and put me in a 
peaceful mood. I' 11 be safe as long as he goes on sleeping peacefully like this, I'd tell myself. Which 
is why I spent a lot of time watching him in his sleep. 

But, somewhere along the way, I had given up the habit. When had that been? I tried to remember. It 
had probably happened back when my mother-in-law and I were sort of quarrelling over what name 
to give my son. She was big on some religious cult kind of thing, and had asked her priest to "bestow" 
a name on the baby I don't remember exactly the name she was given, but I had no intention of letting 
some priest "bestow" a name on my child. We had some pretty violent arguments at the time, but my 
husband couldn't say a thing to either of us. He stood by and tried to calmus. 

After that, I lost the feeling that my husband was my protector. The one thing I thought I wanted 
from him he had failed to give me. All he had managed to do was make me furious. This happened a 
long time ago, of course. My mother-in-law and I have long since made up. I gave my son the name I 
wanted to give him. My husband and I made up right away, too. 

I' m pretty sure that was the end, though, of my watching him in his sleep. 

So there I stood, looking at him sleeping as soundly as always. One bare foot stuck out from under 
the covers at a strange angle — so strange that the foot could have belonged to someone else. It was a 
big, chunky foot. My husband's mouth hung open, the lower lip drooping. Every once in a while, his 
nostrils would twitch. There was a mole under his eye that bothered me. It was so big and vulgar- 
looking. There was something vulgar about the way his eyes were closed, the lids slack, covers made 
of faded human flesh. He looked like an absolute fool. This was what they mean by "dead to the 
world." How incredibly ugly! He sleeps with such an ugly face! It's just too gruesome, I thought. He 



couldn't have been like this in the old days. I'm sure he must have had a better face when we were 
first married, one that was taut and alert. Even sound asleep, he couldn't have been such a blob. 

I tried to remember what his sleeping face had looked like back then, but I couldn't do it, though I 
tried hard enough. Ali I could be sure of was that he couldn 't have had such a terrible face. Or was I 
just deceiving myself? Maybe he had always looked like this in his sleep and I had been indulging in 
some kind of emotional projection. I'm sure that' s what my mother would say. That sort of thinking 
was a specialty of hers. "Ali that lovey-dovey stuff lasts two years — three years tops," she always 
used to insist. "You were a new bride," I'm sure she would tell me now. "Of course, your little hubby 
looked like a darling in his sleep." 

I'm sure she would say something like that, but I'mjust as sure she'd be wrong. He had grown ugly 
over the years. The firmness had gone out of his face. That's what growing old is all about. He was 
old now, and tired. Worn out. He'd get even uglier in the years ahead, that much was certain. And I 
had no choice but to go along with it, put up with it, resign myself to it. 

I let out a sigh as I stood there watching him. It was a deep sigh, a noisy one as sighs go, but of 
course he didn't move a muscle. The loudest sigh in the world would never wake himup. 

I left the bedroom and went back to the living room. I poured myself a brandy and started reading. 
But something wouldn't let me concentrate. I put the book down and went to my son's room Opening 
the door, I stared at his face in the light spilling in from the hallway. He was sleeping just as soundly 
as my husband was. As he always did. I watched him in his sleep, looked at his smooth, nearly 
featureless face. It was very different from my husband's: It was still a child's face, after all. The skin 
still glowed; it still had nothing vulgar about it. 

And yet, something about my son's face annoyed me. I had never felt anything like this about him 
before. What could be making me feel this way? I stood there, looking, with my arms folded. Yes, of 
course I loved my son, loved him tremendously. But still, undeniably, that something was bothering 
me, getting on my nerves. 

I shook my head. 

I closed my eyes and kept them shut. Then I opened them and looked at my son's face again. And 
then it hit me. What bothered me about my son's sleeping face was that it looked exactly like my 
husband's. And exactly like my mother-in-law's. Stubborn. Self-satisfied. It was in their blood — a 
kind of arrogance I hated in my husband's family True, my husband is good to me. He's sweet and 
gentle and he's carefiil to take my feelings into account. He's never fooled around with other women, 
and he works hard. He's serious, and he's kind to everybody. My friends all tell me how lucky I amto 
have him And I can't fault him, either. Which is exactly what galls me sometimes. His very absence 
of faults makes for a strange rigidity that excludes imagination. That's what grates onme so. 

And that was exactly the kind of expression my son had on his face as he slept. 

I shook my head again. This little boy is a stranger to me, fmally Even after he grows up, he'll 
never be able to understand me, just as my husband can hardly understand what I feel now. 

I love my son, no question. But I sensed that someday I would no longer be able to love this boy 
with the same intensity. Not a very maternal thought. Most mothers never have thoughts like that. But 
as I stood there looking at him asleep, I knew with absolute certainty that one day I would come to 
despise him. 

The thought made me terribly sad. I closed his door and turned out the hall light. I went to the 



living-room sofa, sat down, and opened my book. After reading a few pages, I closed it again. I 
looked at the clock. A little before three. 

I wondered how many days it had been since I stopped sleeping. The sleeplessness started the 
Tuesday before last. Which made this the seventeenth day. Not one wink of sleep in seventeen days. 
Seventeen days and seventeen nights. A long, long time. I couldn't even recall what sleep was like. 

I closed my eyes and tried to recall the sensation of sleeping, but all that existed for me inside was 
a wakeful darkness. A wakeful darkness: What it called to mind was death. 

Was I about to die? 

And if I died now, what would my life have amounted to? 
There was no way I could answer that. 
All right, then, what was death? 

Until now, I had conceived of sleep as a kind of model for death. I had imagined death as an 
extension of sleep. A far deeper sleep than ordinary sleep. A sleep devoid of all consciousness. 
Eternal rest. A total blackout. 

But now I wondered if I had been wrong. Perhaps death was a state entirely unlike sleep, 
something that belonged to a different category altogether — like the deep, endless, wakeful darkness I 
was seeing now. 

No, that would be too terrible. If the state of death was not to be a rest for us, then what was going 
to redeem this imperfect life of ours, so fraught with exhaustion? Finally, though, no one knows what 
death is. Who has ever truly seen it? No one. Except the ones who are dead. No one living knows 
what death is like. They can only guess. And the best guess is still a guess. Maybe death is a kind of 
rest, but reasoning can' t tell us that. The only way to find out what death is is to die. Death can be 
anything at all. 

An intense terror overwhelmed me at the thought. A stiffening chill ran down my spine. My eyes 
were still shut tight. I had lost the power to open them. I stared at the thick darkness that stood planted 
in front of me, a darkness as deep and hopeless as the universe itself. I was all alone. My mind was in 
deep concentration, and expanding. If I had wanted to, I could have seen into the uttermost depths of 
the universe. But I decided not to look. It was too soon for that. 

If death was like this, if to die meant being eternally awake and staring into the darkness like this, 
what should I do? 

At last, I managed to open my eyes. I gulped down the brandy that was left in my glass. 

Imtakingoff my pajamas and putting on jeans, a T-shirt, and a windbreaker. I tie my hair back in a tight 
ponytail, tuck it under the windbreaker, and put on a baseball cap of my husband's. In the mirror, I 
look like a boy. Good. I put on sneakers and go down to the garage. 

I slip in behind the steering wheel, turn the key, and listen to the engine hum. It sounds normal. 
Hands on the wheel, I take a few deep breaths. Then I shift into gear and drive out of the building. The 
car is running better than usual. It seems to be gliding across a sheet of ice. I ease it into higher gear, 
move out of the neighborhood, and enter the highway to Yokohama. 

It's only three in the morning, but the number of cars on the road is by no means small. Huge semis 
roli past, shaking the ground as they head east. Those guys don't sleep at night. They sleep in the 



daytime and work at night for greater efficiency. 

What a waste. I could work day and night. I don't have to sleep. 

This is biologically unnatural, I suppose, but who really knows what is natural? They just infer it 
inductively. I'm beyond that. A priori. An evolutionary leap. A woman who never sleeps. An 
expansion of consciousness. 

I have to smile. A priori. An evolutionary leap. 

Listening to the car radio, I drive to the harbor. I want classical music, but I can't find a station that 
broadcasts it at night. Stupid Japanese rock music. Love songs sweet enough to rot your teeth. I give 
up searching and listen to those. They make me feel I'm in a far-off place, far away from Mozart and 
Haydn. 

I puli into one of the white-outlined spaces in the big parking lot at the waterfront park and cut my 
engine. This is the brightest area of the lot, under a lamp, and wide open all around. Only one car is 
parked here — an old white two-door coupe of the kind that young people like to drive. Probably a 
couple in there now, making love — no money for a hotel room. To avoid trouble, I puli my hat low, 
trying not to look like a woman. I check to see that my doors are locked. 

Half-consciously, I let my eyes wander through the surrounding darkness, when all of a sudden I 
remember a drive I took with my boyfriend the year I was a college freshman. We parked and got into 
some heavy petting. He couldn't stop, he said, and he begged me to let him put it in. But I refused. 
Hands on the steering wheel, listening to the music, I try to bring back the scene, but I can't recall his 
face. It seems to have happened such an incredibly long time ago. 

All the memories I have from the time before I stopped sleeping seem to be moving away with 
accelerating speed. It feels so strange, as if the me who used to go to sleep every night is not the real 
me, and the memories from back then are not really mine. This is how people change. But nobody 
realizes it. Nobody notices. Only I know what happens. I could try to tell them, but they wouldn't 
understand. They wouldn't believe me. Or if they did believe me, they would have absolutely no idea 
what I'm feeling. They would only see me as a threat to their inductive worldview. 

I am changing, though. Really changing. 

How long have I been sitting here? Hands on the wheel. Eyes closed. Staring into the sleepless 
darkness. 

Suddenly I'm aware of a human presence, and I come to myself again. There's somebody out there. 
I open my eyes and look around. Someone is outside the car. Trying to open the door. But the doors 
are locked. Dark shadows on either side of the car, one at each door. Can't see their faces. Can't 
make out their clothing. Just two dark shadows, standing there. 

Sandwiched between them, my Civic feels tiny — like a little pastry box. It's being rocked from 
side to side. A fist is pounding on the right-hand window. I know it's not a policeman. A policeman 
would never pound on the glass like this and would never shake my car. I hold my breath. What 
should I do? I can't think straight. My underarms are soaked. Fve got to get out of here. The key. Turn 
the key. I reach out for it and turn it to the right. The starter grinds. 

The engine doesn't catch. My hand is shaking. I close my eyes and turn the key again. No good. A 
sound like fmgernails clawing a giant wali. The motor turns and turns. The men — the dark shadows — 
keep shaking my car. The swings get bigger and bigger. They' re going to tip me over! 

There's something wrong. Just calm down and think, then everything will be okay. Think. Just think. 



Slowly. Carefully. Something is wrong. 
Something is wrong. 

But what? I can't tell. My mind is crammed tuli of thick darkness. It's not taking me anywhere. My 
hands are shaking. I try pulling out the key and putting it back in again. But my shaking hand can't find 
the hole. I try again and drop the key. I curi over and try to pick it up. But I can't get hold of it. The car 
is rocking back and forth. My forehead slams against the steering wheel. 

Fll never get the key. I fail back against the seat, cover my face with my hands. F m crying. Ali I 
can do is cry The tears keep pouring out. Locked inside this little box, I can't go anywhere. It's the 
middle of the night. The men keep rocking the car back and forth. They're going to turn it over. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



The f a L i 
O F Th r 

R O m A ISI 

E M P I R E 

Th e i a S 1 

INDIAN 

u P R I S I n G , 
htlER ' S 
I N v A s .o N 
OF Poland, 
A n D The R E A L m 
O f RAGI N G 
W I N D s 



THE FALL 
OF THE 
ROMAN EMPIRE 



I first noticed the wiiid had begun to blow in the afternoon on Sunday. Or more precisely, at seven past 
two in the afternoon. 

At the time, just like always — just like I always do on Sunday afternoons, that is — I was sitting at 
the kitchen table, listening to some innocuous music while catching up on a week's worth of entries in 
my diary I make a practice of jotting down each day's events throughout the week, then writing them 
up on Sunday. 

I'd just finished with the three days up through Tuesday when I became aware of the strong winds 
droning past my window. I canned the diary entries, capped my pen, and went out to the veranda to 
take in the laundry. The things on the line were all aflutter, whipping out loud, dry cracks, streaming 
their crazed comet tails off into space. 

When I least suspected it, the wind seemed to have picked up out of nowhere. Hanging out the 
laundry on the veranda in the morning — at eighteen past ten in the morning, to be exact — there hadn't 
been the slightest whisper of a breeze. About that my memory is as airtight as the lid on a blast 
furnace. Because for a second there I'd even thought: No need for clothespins on such a calm day. 

There honest to goodness hadn 't been a puff of air moving anywhere. 

Swiftly gathering up the laundry, I then went around shutting all the windows in the apartment. Once 
the windows were closed, I could hardly hear the wind at all. Outside in the absence of sound, the 
trees — Himalayan cedars and chestnuts, mostly — squirmed like dogs with an uncontrollable itch. 
Swatches of cloud cover slipped across the sky and out of sight like shifty-eyed secret agents, while 
on the veranda of an apartment across the way several shirts had wrapped themselves around a 
plastic clothesline and were clinging frantically, like abandoned orphans. 

It 's really blowing up a gale, I thought. 

Upon opening the newspaper and checking out the weather map, however, I didn't fmd any sign of 
a typhoon. The probability of rainfall was listed at 0%. Apeaceful Sunday afternoon like the heyday 
of the Roman Empire, it was supposed to have been. 

I let out a slight, maybe 30% sigh and folded up the newspaper, tidied the laundry away in the chest 
of drawers, made cofTee while listening to more of the same innocuous music, then carried on with my 
diary keeping over a hot cup. 

Thursday, I slept with my girlfriend. She likes to wear a blindfold during sex. She always carries 
around a piece of cloth in her airline overnight bag just for that purpose. 

Not my thing, really, but she looks so cute blindfolded like that, I can't very well object. We're all 
human, after all, and everybody's got something a little off somewhere. 

That's pretty much what I wrote for the Thursday entry in my diary. Eighty percent facts, 20% short 
comments, that's my diary policy. 

Friday, I ran into an old friend in a Ginza bookstore. He was wearing a tie with the most ungodly 
pattern. Telephone numbers, a whole slew of them, on a striped background — I'd gotten that far when 
the telephone rang. 



2. 

THE 1881 
INDIAN 
UPRISING 

Itwasthiktysk past two by the clock when the telephone rang. Probably her — my girlfriend with the thing 
about blindfolds, that is — or so I thought. She'd planned on coming over on Sunday anyway, and she 
always makes a point of ringing up beforehand. It was her job to buy groceries for dinner. We'd 
decided on oyster hot pot for that evening. 

Anyway, it was two-thirty-six in the afternoon when the telephone rang. I have the alarm clock 
sitting right next to the telephone. That way I always see the clock when I go for the telephone, so I 
recall that much perfectly. 

Yet when I picked up the receiver, all I could hear was this fierce wind blowing. A rummmmmble 
full of fury, like the Indians all rising on the warpath in 1881, right there in the receiver. They were 
burning pioneer cabins, cutting telegraph lines, raping Candice Bergen. 

"Hello?" I ventured, but my lone voice got sucked under the overwhelming tumult of history. 

"Hello? Hello?" I shouted out loud, againto no avail. 

Straining my ears, I could just barely make out the faintest catches of what might have been a 
woman's voice through the wind. Or then again, maybe I was hearing things. Whatever, the wind was 
too strong to be sure. And I guess too many bufTalo had already bitten the dust. 

I couldn't say a word. I just stood there with the receiver to my ear. Hard and fast, I had the thing 
practically glued to my ear. I almost thought it wasn't going to come off. But then, after fifteen or 
twenty seconds like that, the telephone cut off. It was as if a lifeline had snapped in a seizure. After 
which a vast and empty silence, warmthless as overbleached underwear, was all that remained. 



3. 

HITLER'S 
INVASION 
OF POLAND 

That does it. I let out another sigh. And I continued with my diary, thinking I'd better just fmish 
logging it in. 

Saturday, Hitler's armored divisions invaded Poland. Dive bombers over Warsaw — 

No, that's not right. That's not what happened. Hitler's invasion of Poland was on September 1, 
1939. Not yesterday. After dinner yesterday, I went to the movies and saw Meryl Streep in Sophie's 
Choice. Hitler's invasion of Poland only figured in the film. 

In the film, Meryl Streep divorces Dustin Hoflman, but then in a commuter train she meets this civil 
engineer played by Robert De Niro, and remarries. A pretty all-right movie. 

Sitting next to me was a high-school couple, and they kept touching each other on the tummy the 
whole time. Not bad at all, your high-school student's tummy Even me, time was I used to have a 
high-school student's tummy. 



4. 

AND THE 
REALM OF 
RAGING 
WINDS 



Once itj souared away the previous week's worth in my diary, I sat myself down in front of the record rack 
and picked out some music for a windy Sunday afternoon's listening. I settled on a Shostakovich cello 
concerto and a Sly and the Family Stone album, selections that seemed suitable enough for high 
winds, and I listened to these two records one after the other. 

Every so often, things would strafe past the window. A white sheet flying east to west like some 
sorcerer brewing an elixir of roots and herbs. A long, flimsy tin sign arching its sickly spine like an 
anal-sex enthusiast. 

I was taking in the scene outside to the strains of the Shostakovich cello concerto when again the 
telephone rang. The alarm clock beside the telephone read 3:48. 

I picked up the receiver fully expecting that Boeing 747 jet-engine roar, but this time there was no 
wind to be heard. 

"Hello," she said. 

"Hello," I said, too. 

"I was just thinking about heading over with the fixings for the oyster hot pot, okay?" said my 
girlfriend. She '11 be on her way with groceries and a blindfold. 

"Fine by me, but — " 

"You have a casserole?" 

"Yes, but," I say, "what gives? I don't hear that wind anymore." 

"Yeah, the wind's stopped. Here inNakano it let up at three twenty-five. So I don't imagine it'll be 
long before it lets up over there." 

"Maybe so," I said as I hung up the telephone, then took down the casserole from the above-closet 
storage compartment and washed it in the sink. 

Just as she had predicted, the winds stopped, at 4:05 on the dot. I opened the windows and looked 
around outside. Directly below, a black dog was intently sniffmg around at the ground. For fifteen or 
twenty minutes, the dog kept at it tirelessly. I couldn't imagine why the dog felt so compelled. 

Other than that, though, the appearances and workings of the world remained unchanged from 
before the winds had started. The Himalayan cedars and chestnuts stood their open ground, aloof as if 
nothing had transpired. Laundry hung limply from plastic clotheslines. Atop the telephone poles, 
crows gave a flap or two of their wings, their beaks shiny as credit cards. 

Meanwhile during all of this, my girlfriend had shown up and began to prepare the hot pot. She 
stood there in the kitchen cleaning the oysters, briskly chopping Chinese cabbage, arranging blocks of 
tofu just so, simmering broth. 

I asked her whether she hadn't tried telephoning at 2:36. 

"I called, all right," she answered while rinsing rice in a colander. 

'T couldn't hear a thing," I said. 

"Yeah, right, the wind was tremendous," she said matter-of-factly. 

I got a beer out of the refrigerator and sat down on the edge of the table to drink it. 



"But, really, why all of a sudden this fury of wind, then, again, just like that, nothing?" I asked her. 

"You got me," she said, her back turned toward me as she shelled shrimps with her fingernails. 
"There's lots we don't know about the wind. Same as there's lots we don't know about ancient 
history or cancer or the ocean floor or outer space or sex." 

"Hmm," I said. That was no answer. Still, it didn't look like there was much chance of furthering 
this line of conversation with her, so I just gave up and watched the oyster hot pot' s progress. 

"Say, can I touch your tummy?" I asked her. 

"Later," she said. 

So until the hot pot was ready, I decided to puli together a few brief notes on the day's events so I 
could write them up in my diary next week. This is what I jotted down: 

• Fail of Roman Empire 

• 1881 Indian Uprising 

• Hitler's Invasion of Poland 

Just this, and even next week I'd be able to reconstruct what went on today. Precisely because of 
this meticulous system of mine, I have managed to keep a diary for twenty-two years without missing 
a day. To every meaningful act, its own system. Whether the wind blows or not, that' s the way I live. 

— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



LederhOS E N 



IVloTHERDUMPED MY FATHER, " a friend of my wife's was saying one day, "all because of a pair of shorts." 
Fve got to ask. "A pair of shorts?" 

"I know it sounds strange," she says, "because it is a strange story." 

A LARGE WOMAN, her height and build are almost the same as mine. She tutors electric organ, but most of her 
free time she divides among swimming and skiing and tennis, so she 's trim and always tanned. You 
might call her a sports fanatic. On days off, she puts in a morning run before heading to the local pool 
to do laps; then at two or three in the afternoon it's tennis, followed by aerobics. Now, I like my 
sports, but Fmnowhere near her league. 

I don't mean to suggest she's aggressive or obsessive about things. Quite the contrary, she's really 
rather retiring; she 'd never dream of putting emotional pressure on anyone. Only, she's driven; her 
body — and very likely the spirit attached to that body — craves after vigorous activity, relentless as a 
comet. 

Which may have something to do with why she's unmarried. Oh, she's had affairs — the woman may 
be a little on the large side, but she is beautiful; she's been proposed to, even agreed to take the 
plunge. But inevitably, whenever it's gotten to the wedding stage, some problem has come up and 
everything falls through. 

Like my wife says, "She's just unlucky." 

"Well, I guess," I sympathize. 

F m not in total agreement with my wife on this. True, luck may rule over parts of a person's life 
and luck may cast patches of shadow across the ground of our being, but where there's a will — much 
less a strong will to swim thirty laps or run twenty kilometers — there's a way to overcome most any 
trouble with whatever stepladders you have around. No, her heart was never set on marrying, is how I 
see it. Marriage just doesn't fail within the sweep of her comet, at least not entirely. 

And so she keeps on tutoring electric organ, devoting every free moment to sports, falling regularly 
in and out of unlucky love. 

It's a rainy sunday afternoon and she's come two hours earlier than expected, while my wife is still out 
shopping. 

"Forgive me," she apologizes. "I took a rain check on today's tennis, which left me two hours to 
spare. I'd have been bored out of my mind being alone at home, so I just thought . . . Am I interrupting 
anything?" 

Not at all, I say. I didn't feel quite in the mood to work and was just sitting around, cat on my lap, 
watching a video. I show her in, go to the kitchen and make coffee. Two cups, for watching the last 
twenty minutes ofJaws. Of course, we've both seen the movie before — probably more than once — so 
neither of us is particularly riveted to the tube. But anyway, we're watching it because it's there in 
front of our eyes. 

It's The End. The credits roli up. No sign of my wife. So we chat a bit. Sharks, seaside, swimming 
. . . still no wife. We go on talking. Now, I suppose I like the woman well enough, but after an hour of 
this our lack of things in common becomes obvious. In a word, she's my wife's friend, not mine. 

Short of what else to do, I' m already thinking about popping in the next video when she suddenly 
brings up the story of her parents' divorce. I can't fathomthe connection — at least to my mind, there's 



no link between swimming and her folks splitting up — but I guess a reason is where you fmd it. 



1 HhY WERKNT REALLY SHORTS, " she says. "They were lederhosen." 

"You mean those hiking pants the Germans wear? The ones with the shoulder straps?" 

"You got it. Father wanted a pair of lederhosen as a souvenir gift. Well, Father's pretty tali for his 
generation. He might even look good in them, which could be why he wanted them. But can you 
picture a Japanese wearing lederhosen? I guess it takes all kinds." 

I'm still not any closer to the story. I have to ask, what were the circumstances behind her father's 
request — and of whom? — for these souvenir lederhosen? 

"Oh, I'm sorry. I'm always telling things out of order. Stop me if things don't make sense," she 
says. 

Okay, I say. 

"Mother's sister was living in Germany and she invited Mother for a visit. Something she'd always 
been meaning to do. Of course, Mother can't speak German, she'd never evenbeen abroad, but having 
been an English teacher for so long she'd had that overseas bee in her bonnet. It'd been ages since 
she'd seen my aunt. So Mother approached Father, How about taking ten days off and going to 
Germany, the two of us? Father's work couldn't allow it, and Mother ended up going alone." 

"That' s whenyour father asked for the lederhosen, I take it?" 

"Right," she says. "Mother asked what he wanted her to bring back, and Father said lederhosen." 
"Okay so far." 

Her parents were reasonably close. They didn't argue until all hours of the night; her father didn't 
storm out of the house and not come home for days on end. At least not then, though apparently there 
had been rows more than once over him and other women. 

"Not a bad man, a hard worker, but kind of a skirt chaser," she tosses off matter-of-factly. No 
relation of hers, the way she's talking. For a second, I almost think her father is deceased. But no, I'm 
told, he's alive and well. 

"Father was already up there in years, and by then those troubles were all behind them. They 
seemed to be getting along just fme." 

Things, however, didn't go without incident. Her mother extended the ten days in Germany to 
nearly a month and a half, with hardly a word back to Tokyo, and when she fmally did return to Japan 
she stayed with another sister of hers in Osaka. She never did come back home. 

Neither she — the daughter — nor her father could understand what was going on. Until then, when 
there 'd been marital difficulties, her mother had always been the patient one — so ploddingly patient, 
in fact, that she sometimes wondered if the woman had no imagination; family always came first, and 
the mother was selflessly devoted to her daughter. So when the mother didn't come around, didn't 
even make the effort to call, it was beyond their comprehension. They made phone calls to the aunt's 
house in Osaka, repeatedly, but they could hardly get her to come to the phone, much less admit what 
her intentions were. 

In mid- September, two months after returning to Japan, her mother made her intentions known. One 
day, out of the blue, she called home and told her husband, "You will be receiving the necessary 
papers for divorce. Please sign, seal, and send back to me." Would she care to explain, her husband 



asked, what was the reason? "Fve lost all love for you — in any way, shape, or form." Oh? said her 
husband. Was there no room for discussion? "Sorry, none, absolutely none." 

Telephone negotiations dragged on for the next two or three months, but her mother did not back 
down an inch, and finally her father consented to the divorce. He was in no position to force the issue, 
his own track record being what it was, and anyway, he always tended to give in. 

"All this came as a big shock," she tells me. "But it wasn't just the divorce. I'd imagined my 
parents splitting up many times, so I was already prepared for it psychologically. If the two of them 
had just plain divorced without all that funny business, I wouldn't have gotten so upset. The problem 
wasn't Mother dumping Father; Mother was dumping me, too. That' s what hurt." 

I nod. 

"Up to that point, I'd always taken Mother 's side, and Mother would always stand by me. And yet 
here was Mother throwing me out with Father, like so much garbage, and not a word of explanation. It 
hit me so hard, I wasn't able to forgive Mother for the longest time. I wrote her who knows how many 
letters asking her to set things straight, but she never answered my questions, never even said she 
wanted to see me." 

It wasn't until three years later that she actually saw her mother. At a family funeral, of all places. 
By then, the daughter was living on her own — she 'd moved out in her sophomore year, when her 
parents divorced — and now she had graduated and was tutoring electric organ. Meanwhile, her 
mother was teaching English at a prep school. 

Her mother confessed that she hadn't been able to talk to her own daughter because she hadn't 
known what to say. 'T myself couldn't tell where things were going," the mother said, "but the whole 
thing started over that pair of shorts." 

"Shorts?" She'd been as startled as I was. She'd never wanted to speak to her mother ever again, 
but curiosity got the better of her. In their mourning dress, mother and daughter went into a nearby 
cofTee shop and ordered iced tea. She had to hear this — pardon the expression — this short story. 

1 HE SHOP THAT SOLD the lederhosen was in a small town an hour away by train from Hamburg. Her mother 's 
sister looked it up for her. 

"All the Germans I know say if you' re going to buy lederhosen, this is the place. The craftsmanship 
is good, and the prices aren't so expensive," said her sister. 

So the mother boarded a train to buy her husband his souvenir lederhosen. In her train compartment 
sat a middle-aged German couple, who conversed with her in halting English. 'T go now to buy 
lederhosen for souvenir," the mother said. "Vat shop you go to?" the couple asked. The mother named 
the name of the shop, and the middle-aged German couple chimed in together, "Zat is ze place, j ah. It 
is ze best." Hearing this, the mother felt very confident. 

It was a delightful early-summer afternoon and a quaint old-fashioned town. Through the middle of 
the town flowed a babbling brook, its banks lush and green. Cobblestone streets led in all directions, 
and cats were everywhere. The mother stepped into a cafe for a bite of Kas ekuchen and coffee. 

She was on her last sip of coffee and playing with the shop cat when the owner came over to ask 
what brought her to their little town. She said lederhosen, whereupon the owner pulled out a pad of 
paper and drew a map to the shop. 

"Thank you very much," the mother said. 



How wonderful it was to travel by oneself, she thought as she walked along the cobblestones. In 
fact, this was the first time in her fifty-five years that she had traveled alone. During the whole trip, 
she had not once been lonely or afraid or bored. Every scene that met her eyes was fresh and new; 
everyone she met was friendly Each experience called forth emotions that had been slumbering in 
her, untouched and unused. What she had held near and dear until then — husband and home and 
daughter — was on the other side of the earth. She felt no need to trouble herself over them. 

She found the lederhosen shop without problem. It was a tiny old guild shop. It didn't have a big 
sign for tourists, but inside she could see scores of lederhosen. She opened the door and walked in. 

Two old men worked in the shop. They spoke in a whisper as they took down measurements and 
scribbled them into a notebook. Behind a curtain divider was a larger work space; the monotone of 
sewing machines could be heard. 

"Darf ich Ihnen helfen, Madame? " the larger of the two old men addressed the mother. 

"I want to buy lederhosen," she responded in English. 

"Ziss make problem" The old man chose his words with care. "Ve do not make article for 
customer who not exist." 

"My husband exist," the mother said with confidence. 

"Jah, jah, your husband exist, of course, of course," the old man responded hastily. "Excuse my not 
good English. Vat I vant say, if your husband not exist here, ve cannot sell ze lederhosen." 

"Why?" the mother asked, perplexed. 

"Is store policy. Ist unser Prinzip. Ve mus t see ze lederhosen how it fit customer, ve alter very 
nice, only zen ve sell. Over one hundred years ve are in business, ve build reputation on ziss policy." 

"But I spend half day to come from Hamburg to buy your lederhosen." 

"Very sorry, madame," said the old man, looking very sorry indeed. "Ve make no exception. Ziss 
vorld is very uncertain vorld. Trust is difficult sink to earn but easy sink to lose." 

The mother sighed and stood in the doorway. She racked her brain for some way to break the 
impasse. The larger old man explained the situation to the smaller old man, who nodded sadly, jah, 
jah. Despite their great difference in size, the two old men wore identical expressions. 

"Well, perhaps, can we do this?" the mother proposed. 'T find man just like my husband and bring 
him here. That man puts on lederhosen, you alter very nice, you sell lederhosen to me." 

The first old man looked her in the face, aghast. 

"But, madame, zat is against rule. Is not same man who tries ze lederhosen on, your husband. And 
ve know ziss. Ve cannot do ziss." 

"Pretend you do not know. You sell lederhosen to that man and that man sell lederhosen to me. That 
way, there is no shame to your policy. Please, I beg you. I may never come back to Germany. If I do 
not buy lederhosen now, I will never buy lederhosen." 

"Hmph," the old man pouted. He thought for a few seconds, then turned to the other old man and 
spoke a stream of German. They spoke back and forth several times. Then, fmally, the large man 
turned back to the mother and said, "Very well, madame. As exception — very exception, you please 
understand — ve vill know nossink of ziss matter. Not so many come from Yapan to buy lederhosen, 
and ve Germans not so slow in ze head. Please fmd man very like your husband. My brother he says 
ziss." 



"Thank you," she said. Then she managed to thank the other brother in German: "Das ist so nett 
von Ihnen. " 

OHE — THE DAUGHTER who's telling me this story — folds her hands on the table and sighs. I drink the last of my 
coffee, long since cold. The rain keeps corning down. Still no sign of my wife. Who'd have ever 
thought the conversation would take this turn? 

"So then?" I interject, eager to hear the conclusion. "Did your mother end up fmding someone with 
the same build as your father?" 

"Yes," she says, utterly without expression. "Mother sat on a bench looking for someone who 
matched Father 's size. And along came a man who fit the part. Without asking his permission — it 
seems the man couldn't speak a word of English — she dragged him to the lederhosen shop." 

"The hands-on approach," I joke. 

'T don't know. At home, Mother was always a normal sensible-shoes woman," she said with 
another sigh. "The shopkeepers explained the situation to the man, and the man gladly consented to 
stand in for Father. He puts the lederhosen on, and they're pulling here and tucking there, the three of 
them chortling away in German. In thirty minutes the job was done, during which time Mother made 
up her mind to divorce Father." 

"Wait," I say, 'T don't get it! Did something happen during those thirty minutes?" 

"Nothing at all. Only those three German men ha-ha-ha-ing like bellows." 

"But what made your mother do it?" 

"That's something even Mother herself didn't understand at the time. It made her defensive and 
confused. Ali she knew was, looking at that man in the lederhosen, she felt an unbearable disgust 
rising in her. Directed toward Father. And she could not hold it back. Mother 's lederhosen man, apart 
from the color of his skin, was exactly like Father, the shape of the legs, the belly, the thinning hair. 
The way he was so happy trying on those new lederhosen, all prancy and cocky like a little boy. As 
Mother stood there looking at this man, so many things she 'd been uncertain of about herself slowly 
shifted together into something very clear. That's when she realized she hated Father." 

My WIFE GETS HOME from shopping, and the two of them commence their woman talk, but I' m still thinking 
about the lederhosen. The three of us eat an early dinner and have a few drinks; I keep turning the 
story over in my mind. 

"So, you don't hate your mother anymore?" I ask when my wife leaves the room 

"No, not really. We're not close at all, but I don't hold anything against her." 

"Because she told you about the lederhosen?" 

"I think so. After she explained things to me, I couldn't go on hating her. I can't say why it makes 
any difference, I certainly don't know how to explain it, but it may have something to do with us being 
women." 

"Still, if you leave the lederhosen out of it, supposing it was just the story of a woman taking a trip 
and fmding herself, would you have been able to forgive her?" 

"Of course not," she says without hesitation. "The whole point is the lederhosen, right?" 

A proxy pair of lederhosen, F m thinking, that her father never even received. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



A F? N 



b U R N I N o 



I metherat the wedding party of an acquaintance and we got friendly This was three years ago. We were 
nearly a whole generation apart in age — she twenty, myself thirty-one — but that hardly got in the way. 
I had plenty of other things to worry my head about at the time, and to be perfectly honest, I didn't 
have a spare moment to think about age difference. And our ages never bothered her from the very 
beginning. I was married, but that didn't matter, either. She seemed to consider things like age and 
family and income to be of the same a priori order as shoe size and vocal pitch and the shape of one's 
fmgernails. The sort of thing that thinking about won't change one bit. And that much said, well, she 
had a point. 

She was working as an advertising model to earn a living while studying pantomime under 
somebody-or-other, a famous teacher, apparently. Though the work end of things was a drag and she 
was always turning downjobs her agent lined up, so her money situation was really rather precarious. 
But whatever she lacked in take-home pay she probably made up for on the goodwill of a number of 
boyfriends. Naturally, I don't know this for certain; it's just what I pieced together from snippets of 
her conversation. 

Still, F m not suggesting there was even a glimmer of a hint that she was sleeping with guys for 
money. Though perhaps she did come close to that on occasion. Yet even if she did, that was not an 
essential issue; the essentials were surely far more simple. And the long and short of it was, this 
guileless simplicity is what attracted a particular kind of person. The kind of men who had only to set 
eyes on this simplicity of hers before they'd be dressing it up with whatever feelings they held inside. 
Not exactly the best explanation, but even she 'd have to admit it was this simplicity that supported 
her. 

Of course, this sort of thing couldn't go on forever. (If it could, we'd have to turn the entire 
workings of the universe upside down.) The possibility did exist, but only under specific 
circumstances, for a specific period. Just like with "peeling mandarin oranges." 

"Peeling mandarin oranges?" you say? 

When we first met, she told me she was studying pantomime. 

Oh, really, I'd said, not altogether surprised. Young women are all into something these days. Plus, 
she didn't look like your die-cast polish-your-skills-in-dead-earnest type. 

Then she "peeled a mandarin orange." Literally, that's what she did: She had a glass bowl of 
oranges to her left and another bowl for the peels to her right — so went the setup — in fact, there was 
nothing there. She proceeded to pick up one imaginary orange, then slowly peel it, pop pieces into her 
mouth, and spit out the pulp one section at a time, finally disposing of the skin-wrapped residue into 
the right- hand bowl when she 'd eaten the entire fruit. She repeated this maneuver again and again. In 
so many words, it doesn't sound like much, but I swear, just watching her do this for ten or twenty 
minutes — she and I kept up a running conversation at the counter of this bar, her "peeling mandarin 
oranges" the whole while, almost without a second thought — I felt the reality of everything around me 
being siphoned away. Unnerving, to say the least. Back when Eichmann stood trial in Israel, there was 
talk that the most fitting sentence would be to lock him in a cell and gradually remove all the air. I 
don't really know how he did meet his end, but that's what came to mind. 

"Seems you' re quite talented," I said. 

"Oh, this is nothing. Talent's not involved. It's not a question of making yourself believe there is an 
orange there, you have to forget there isn 't one. That's all." 



"PracticallyZen." 

That's when I took a liking to her. 

We generally didn't see all that much of each other. Maybe once a month, twice at the most. I'd ring 
her up and invite her out somewhere. We'd eat out or go to a bar. We talked intensely; she'd hear me 
out and I'd listen to whatever she had to say. We hardly had any common topics between us, but so 
what? We became, well, pals. Of course, I was the one who paid the bill for all the food and drinks. 
Sometimes she'd call me, typically when she was broke and needed a meal. And then it was 
unbelievable the amount of food she could put away. 

When the two of us were together, I could truly relax. I'd forget all about work I didn't want to do 
and trivial things that' d never be settled anyway and the crazy mixed-up ideas that crazy mixed-up 
people had taken into their heads. It was some kind of power she had. Not that there was any great 
meaning to her words. And if I did catch myself interjecting polite nothings without really tuning in 
what she was saying, there still was something soothing to my ears about her voice, like watching 
clouds drift across the far horizon. 

I did my share of talking, too. Everything from personal matters to sweeping generalities, I told her 
my honest thoughts. I guess she also let some of my verbiage go by, likewise with minimum comment. 
Which was fme by me. It was a mood I was after, not understanding or sympathy. 

Then two years ago in the spring, her father died of a heart ailment, and she came into a small sum 
of money. At least, that's how she described it. With the money, she said, she wanted to travel to 
North Africa. Why North Africa, I didn't know, but I happened to know someone working at the 
Algerian embassy, so I introduced her. Thus she decided to go to Algeria. And as things took their 
course, I ended up seeing her off at the airport. All she carried was a ratty old Boston bag stuffed with 
a couple of changes of clothes. By the look of her as she went through the baggage check, you'd 
almost think she was returning from North Africa, not going there. 

"You really going to come back to Japan in one piece?" I joked. 

"Sure thing. 'I shall return,"'she mocked. 

Three months later, she did. Three kilos lighter than when she left and tanned about six shades 
darker. With her was her new guy, whom she presented as someone she met at a restaurant in Algiers. 
Japanese in Algeria were all too few, so the two of them easily fell in together and eventually became 
intimate. As far I know, this guy was her first real regular lover. 

He was in his late twenties, tali, with a decent build, and rather polite in his speech. A little lean 
on looks, perhaps, though I suppose you could put him in the handsome category. Anyway, he struck 
me as nice enough; he had big hands and long fmgers. 

The reason I know so much about the guy is that I went to meet her when she arrived. A sudden 
telegram from Beirut had given a date and a flight number. Nothing else. Seemed she wanted me to 
come to the airport. When the plane got in — actually, it was four hours late due to bad weather, during 
which time I read three magazines cover to cover in a coffee lounge — the two of them came through 
the gate arm in arm. They looked like a happy young married couple. When she introduced us, he 
shook my hand, virtually in reflex. The healthy handshake of those who've been living a long time 
overseas. After that, we went into a restaurant. She was dying to have a bowl of tempura and rice, she 
said; meanwhile, he and I both had beer. 

He told me he worked in trading but didn't offer any more details. I couldn't tell whether he simply 



didn't want to talk business or was thoughtfully sparing me a boring exposition. Nor, in truth, did I 
especially want to hear about trading, so I didn't press him. With little else to discuss, the 
conversation meandered between safety on the streets of Beirut and water supplies in Tunis. He 
proved to be quite well informed about affairs over the whole of North Africa and the Middle East. 

By now she'd finished her tempura and announced with a big yawn that she was feeling sleepy. I 
half expected her to doze off on the spot. She was precisely the type who could fail asleep anywhere. 
The guy said he'd see her home by taxi, and I said I'd take the train as it was faster. Just why she had 
me come all the way out to the airport was beyond me. 

"Glad I got to meet you," he told me, as if to acknowledge the inconvenience. 

"Same here," I said. 

Thereafter I met up with the guy a number of times. Whenever I ran into her, he was always by her side. 
I'd make a date with her, and he'd drive up in a spotless silver-gray German sports car to let her off. I 
know next to nothing about automobiles, but it reminded me of those jaunty coupes you see in old 
black-and-white Fellini films. Definitely not the sort of car your ordinary salaryman owns. 

"The guy' s got to be loaded," I ventured to comment to her once. 

"Yeah," she said without much interest, 'T guess." 

"Can you really make that much in trading?" 

"Trading?" 

"That' s what he said. He works in trading." 

"Okay, then, I imagine so. . .. But hey, what do I know? He doesn't seem to do much work at all, as 
far as I can see. He does his share of seeing people and talking on the phone, I' 11 say that, though." 

The young man and his money remained a mystery. 

1 HEN ONE SUNDA Y afternoon in October, she rang up. My wife had gone off to see some relatives that morning 
and left me alone at home. A pleasant day, bright and clear, it found me idly gazing at the camphor 
tree outside and enjoying the new autumn apples. I must have eaten a good seven of them that day — it 
was either a pathological craving or some kind of premonition. 

"Listen," she said right off, "just happened to be heading in your direction. Would it be all right if 
we popped over?" 

"We? " I threw back the question. 

"Me and him," came her self-evident reply. 

"Sure," I had to say, "by all means." 

"Okay, we'll be there in thirty minutes," she said, then hung up. 

I lay there on the sofa awhile longer before taking a shower and shaving. As I toweled myself dry, I 
wondered whether to tidy up around the house but canned the idea. There wasn't time. And despite 
the piles of books and magazines and letters and records, the occasional pencil here or sweater there, 
the place didn't seem particularly dirty. I sat back down on the sofa, looked at the camphor tree, and 
ate another apple. 

They showed up a little past two. I heard a car stop in front of the house, and went to the front door 
to see her leaning out the window of the silver-gray coupe, waving. I directed them to the parking 



space around back. 

"We're here," she beamed, all smiles. She wore a sheer blouse that showed her nipples, and an 
olive-green miniskirt. He sported a navy blazer, but there was something else slightly different about 
him; maybe it was the two-day growth of beard. Not at all slovenly looking, it even brought out his 
features a shade. As he stepped from the car, he removed his sunglasses and shoved them into his 
breast pocket. 

"Terribly sorry to be dropping in on you like this on your day off," he apologized. 

"Not at all, don't mind a bit. Every day might as well be a day off with me, and I was getting kind 
of bored here on my own," I allowed. 

"We brought some food," she said, lifting a large white paper bag from the backseat of the car. 

"Food?" 

"Nothing extraordinary," he spoke up. "It's just that, a sudden visit on a Sunday, I thought, why not 
take along something to eat?" 

"Very kind of you. Especially since I haven't had anything but apples all morning." 

We went inside and set the groceries out on the table. It turned out to make quite a spread: roast 
beef sandwiches, salad, smoked salmon, blueberry ice cream — and good quantities at that. While she 
transferred the food to plates, I grabbed a bottle of white wine from the refrigerator. It was like an 
impromptu party. 

"Well, let's dig in. I' m starved," pronounced her usual ravenous self. 

Midway through the feast, having polished off the wine, we tapped into my stock of beer. I can 
usually hold my own, but this guy could drink; no matter how many beers he downed, his expression 
never altered in the slightest. Together with her contribution of a couple of cans, we had in the space 
of a little under an hour racked up a whole tableful of empties. Not bad. Meanwhile, she was pulling 
records from my shelf and loading the player. The first selection to come on was Miles Davis's 
"Airegin." 

"A Garrard autochanger like that's a rare find these days," he observed. Which launched us into 
audiophilia, me going on about the various components of my stereo system, him inserting appropriate 
comments, polite as ever. 

The conversation had reached a momentary lull when the guy said, "I've got some grass. Care to 
smoke?" 

I hesitated, for no other reason than I'd only just quit smoking the month before and I wasn't sure 
what efTect it would have. But in the end, I decided to take a toke or two. Whereupon he fished a foil 
packet from the bottom of the paper bag and rolled a joint. He lit up and took a few puffs to get it 
started, then passed it to me. It was prime stuff. For the next few minutes we didn't say a word as we 
each took hits in turn. Miles Davis had fmished, and we were now into an album of Strauss waltzes. 
Curious combination, but what the hell. 

After one joint, she was already beat, pleading grass on top of three beers and lack of sleep. I 
ferried her upstairs and helped her onto the bed. She asked to borrow a T-shirt. No sooner had I 
handed it to her than she'd stripped to her panties, pulled on the T-shirt, and stretched flat out. By the 
time I got around to asking if she was going to be warm enough, she had already snoozed off. I went 
downstairs, shaking my head. 



Back in the living room, her guy was busy rolling another joint. Plays hard, this dude. Me, I would 
have just as soon snuggled into bed next to her and conked right out. Fat chance. We settled down to 
smoke the second joint, Strauss still waltzing away. Somehow, I was reminded of an elementary- 
school play. I had the part of the old glove maker. A fox cub comes with money to buy gloves, but the 
glove maker says it's not enough for a pair. 

'"Tain 't gonna buy no gloves, " I say. Guess I'm something of a villain. 

"But Mother 's so very c-c-cold. She '11 get chapped p-p-paws. P-p-please, " says the fox cub. 

"Uh-uh, nothing doing. Save your money and come back. Otherwise — " 

"Sometimes I burn barns," the guy was saying. 

"Excuse me?" I asked. Had I misheard him? 

"Sometimes I burn barns," the guy repeated. 

I looked at him. His fingertips traced the pattern on his lighter. Then he took a deep draw on the 
joint and held it in for a good ten seconds before slowly exhaling. The smoke came streaming out of 
his mouth and into the air like ectoplasm. He passed me the roach. 

"Quality product, eh?" he said. 

I nodded. 

"I brought it from India. Top of the line, the best I could find. Smoke this and, it's strange, I recall 
all kinds of things. Lights and smells and like that. The quality of memory . . ." He paused and snapped 
his fingers a few times, as if searching for the right words. "... completely changes. Don't you think?" 

That it did, I concurred. I really was back in the school play, reexperiencing the commotion on 
stage, the smell of the paint on the cardboard backdrop. 

"F d like to hear about this barn thing," I said. 

He looked at me. His face wore no more expression than ever. 

"May I talk about it?" he asked. 

"Whynot?"Isaid. 

"Pretty simple, really. I pour gasoline and throw a lighted match. Flick, and that's it. Doesn't take 
fifteen minutes for the whole thing to burn to the ground." 

"So tell me," I began, then fell silent. I was having trouble fmding the right words, too. "Why is it 
you burn barns?" 

"Is it so strange?" 

"Who knows? You burn barns. I don't burn barns. There's this glaring difference, and to me, rather 
than say which of us is strange, first of all I'd like to clear up just what that difference is. Anyway, it 
was you who brought up this barn thing to begin with." 

"Got me there," he admitted. "You tell it like it is. Say, would you have any Ravi Shankar 
records?" 

No, I didn't, I told him. 

The guy spaced out awhile. I could practically see his mind kneading like Silly Putty. Or maybe it 
was my mind that was squirming around. 

'T burn maybe one barn every two months," he came back. Then he snapped his fingers again. 



"Seems to me that's just about the right pace. For me, that is." 
I nodded vaguely. Pace? 

"Just out of interest, is it your own barns you burn?" I thought to ask. 

The guy looked at me uncomprehendingly. "Why have I got to burn my own barns? What makes you 
thinkl'd have this surplus of barns, myself?" 

"Which means," I continued, "you burn other people's barns, right?" 

"Correct," he said. "Obviously. Other people's barns. Which makes it, as it were, a criminal act. 
Same as you and me smoking this grass here right now. A clear-cut criminal act." 

I shut up, elbows on the arms of my chair. 

"In other words, I wantonly ignite barns that belong to other people. Naturally, I choose ones that 
won't cause major fires. Ali I want to do is simply burn barns." 

I nodded and ground out what was left of the roach. "But, if you get caught, you' 11 be in trouble. 
Whatever, it's arson, and you might get prison." 

"Nobody's going to get caught." He laughed at the very idea. "Pour the gas, light the match, and run. 
Then I watch the whole thing from a distance through binoculars, nice and easy Nobody catches me. 
Really, burn one shitty little barn and the cops hardly even budge." 

Come to think of it, they probably wouldn't. On top of which, who'd suspect a well-dressed young 
man driving a foreign car? 

"And does she know about this?" I asked, pointing upstairs. 

"Not a thing. Fact is, I've never told anyone else about this but you. I' m not the sort to go spouting 
oflf to just anyone." 

"So whyme?" 

The guy extended his fmgers of his left hand and stroked his cheek. The growth of beard made a 
dry, rasping sound. Like a bug walking over a thin, taut sheet of paper. "You' re someone who writes 
novels, so I thought, Wouldn't he be interested in patterns of human behavior and all that? And the 
way I see it, with novelists, before even passing judgment on something, aren't they the kind who are 
supposed to appreciate its form? And even if they can't appreciate it, they should at least accept it at 
face value, no? That's why I told you. I wanted to tell you, from my side." 

I nodded. Just how was I to accept this at face value? From my side, I honestly didn't know. 

"This might be a strange way to put it," he took off again, spreading both hands, then bringing them 
slowly together before his eyes. "But there's a lot of barns in this world, and I've got this feeling that 
they' re all just waiting to be burned. Barns built way off by the seaside, barns built in the middle of 
rice fields ... well, anyway, all kinds of barns. But nothing that fifteen minutes wouldn't burn down, 
nice and neat. It's like that's why they were put there from the very beginning. No grief to anyone. 
They just... vanish. One, two, poof!" 

"But you' re judging that they' re not needed." 

"I'm not judging anything. They' re waiting to be burned. F m simply obliging. You get it? Fm just 
taking on what's there. Just like the rain. The rain falls. Streams swell. Things get swept along. Does 
the rain judge anything? Well, all right, does this make me immoral? In my own way, I'd like to 
believe I've got my own morals. And that's an extremely important force in human existence. A 



person can't exist without morals. I wouldn't doubt if morals weren't the very balance to my 
simultaneity." 

"Simultaneity?" 

"Right, Fm here, and I'm there. I'm in Tokyo, and at the same time I'm in Tunis. F m the one to 
blame, and I'm also the one to forgive. Just as a for instance. It's that level of balance. Without such 
balance, I don't think we could go on living. It's like the linchpin to everything. Lose it and we'd 
literally go to pieces. But for the very reason that I' ve got it, simultaneity becomes possible for me." 

"So what you're saying is, the act of burning barns is in keeping with these morals of yours?" 

"Not exactly. It's an act by which to maintain those morals. But maybe we better just forget the 
morality. It's not essential. What I want to say is, the world is full of these barns. Me, I got my barns, 
and you got your barns. It's the truth. I've been almost everywhere in the world. Experienced 
everything. Came close to dying more than once. Not that I'm proud of it or anything. But okay, let's 
drop it. My fault for being the quiet type all the time. I talk too much when I do grass." 

We fell silent, burned out. I had no idea what to say or how. I was sitting tight in my mental 
passenger seat, just watching one weird scene after the next slip past the car window. My body was 
so loose I couldn't get a good grasp on what the difTerent parts were doing. Yet I was still in touch 
with the idea of my bodily existence. Simultaneity, if ever there was such a thing: Here I had me 
thinking, and here I had me observing myself think. Time ticked on in impossibly minute polyrhythms. 

"Care for a beer?" I asked a little later. 

"Thankyou. I would." 

I went to the kitchen, brought out four cans and some Camembert, and we helped ourselves. 
"When was the last time you burned a barn?" I had to ask. 

"Let's see, now." He strained to remember, beer can in hand. "Summer, the end of August." 
"And the next time, when' 11 that be?" 

"Don't know. It's not like I work out a schedule or mark dates in my calendar. When I get the urge, 
I go burn one." 

"But, say. When you get this urge, some likely barn doesn't just happen to be lying around, does 
it?" 

"Of course not," he said quietly. "That' s why I scout out ones ripe for burning in advance." 

"To lay in stock." 

"Exactly." 

"Can I ask you one more question?" 
"Sure." 

"Have you already decided on the next barn to burn?" 

This caused him to furrow up wrinkles between his eyes; then he inhaled audibly through his nose. 
"Well, yes. As a matter of fact, I have." 

I sipped the last of my beer and said nothing. 

"A great barn. The first barn really worth burning in ages. Fact is, I went and checked it out only 
today." 



"Which means, it must be nearby." 
"Very near," he confirmed. 
So ended our barn talk. 

At five o'clock, he roused his girlfriend, and then apologized to me again for the sudden visit. He 
was completely sober, despite the quantities of beer I'd seen him drink. Then he fetched the sports car 
from around back. 

"F 11 keep an eye out for that barn," I told him 

"You do that," he answered. "Like I said, it's right near here." 

"What's this about a barn?" she broke in. 

"Man talk," he said. 

"Oh, great," she fawned. 

And at that, the two of them were gone. 

I returned to the living room and lay down on the sofa. The table was littered with all manner of 
debris. I picked up my duffle coat off the floor, pulled it over my head, and conked out. 

Bluish gloom and a pungent marijuana odor covered everything. Oddly uneven, that darkness. Lying 
on the sofa, I tried to remember what came next in the elementary-school play, but it was long since 
irretrievable. Did the fox cub ever get the gloves? 

I got up from the sofa, opened a window to air the place, went to the kitchen, and made myself 
some coffee. 

1 HE FOLLOWING DAY , I went to a bookstore and bought a map of the area where I live. Scaled 20,000:1 and 
detailed down to the smallest lanes. Then I walked around with the map, penciling in X's wherever 
there was a barn or shed. For the next three days, I covered four kilometers in all four directions. 
Living toward the outskirts of town, there are still a good many farmers in the vicinity. So it came to a 
considerable number of barns — sixteen altogether. 

I carefully checked the condition of each of these, and from the sixteen I eliminated all those where 
there were houses in the immediate proximity or greenhouses alongside. I also eliminated those in 
which there were farm implements or chemicals or signs that they were still in active use. I didn't 
imagine he'd want to burn tools or fertilizer. 

That left five barns. Five barns worth burning. Or, rather, five barns unobjectionable if burned. The 
kind of barn it'd take fifteen minutes to reduce to ashes, then no one would miss it. Yet I couldn't 
decide which would be the one he'd be most likely to toreh. The rest was a matter of taste. I was 
beside myself for wanting to know which of the five barns he'd chosen. 

I unfolded my map and erased all but those five X's. I got myself a right angle and a French curve 
and dividers, and tried to establish the shortest course leaving from my house, going around the five 
barns, and coming back home again. Which proved to be a laborious operation, what with the roads 
winding about hills and streams. The result: a course of 7.2 kilometers. I measured it several times, 
so I couldn't have been too far off. 

The following morning at six, I put on my training wear and jogging shoes and ran the course. I run 
six kilometers every morning anyway, so adding an extra kilometer wouldn't kill me. There were two 
railroad crossings along the way, but they rarely held you up. And otherwise, the seenery wouldn't be 



bad. 

First thing out of the house, I did a quick circuit around the playing field of the local college, then 
turned down an unpaved road that ran along a stream for three kilometers. Passing the first barn 
midway, a path took me through woods. A slight uphill grade, then another barn. A little beyond that 
were racehorse stables. The Thoroughbreds would be alarmed to see flames — but that' d be it. No 
real damage. 

The third and fourth barns resembled each other like ugly twins. Set not two hundred meters apart, 
both were weather-beaten and dirty. You might as well toreh the both of them together. 

The last barn stood beside a railroad crossing. Roughly the six-kilometer mark. Utterly abandoned, 
the barn had a tin Pepsi-Cola billboard nailed to the side facing the traeks. The structure — if you 
could call it that — was such a shambles, I could see it, as he would say, just waiting to be burned. 

I paused before this last barn, took a few deep breaths, cut over the crossing, and headed home. 
Running time: thirty-one minutes thirty seconds. I showered, ate breakfast, stretehed out on the sofa to 
listen to one record, then got down to work. 

For one month, I ran the same course each morning. But — no barns burned. 

Sometimes, I could swear he was trying to get me to burn a barn. That is, to plant in my head the 
image of burning barns, so that it would swell up like a bicycle tire pumped with air. F 11 grant you, 
there were times that, well, as long as I was waiting around for him to do the deed, I half considered 
striking the mateh myself. It would have been a lot faster. And anyhow, they were only run-down old 
barns.... 

Although on second thought, no, let's not get carried away. You won't see me toreh any barn. No 
matter how inflated the image of burning barns grew in my head, F m really not the type. Me, burn 
barns? Never. Then what about him? He'd probably just switehed prospects. Or else he was too busy 
and simply hadn't found the time to burn a barn. In any case, there was no word from her. 

December came and went, and the morning air pierced the skin. The barns stood their ground, their 
roofs white with frost. Wintering birds sent the echo of flapping wings through the frozen woods. The 
world kept in motion unehanged. 



The next time I met the guy was in the middle of December last year. It was Christmas carols everywhere 
you went. I had gone into town to buy presents for different people, and while walking around 
Nogizaka I spotted his car. No mistake, his silver-gray sports car. Shinagawa license plate, small dent 
next to the left headlight. It was parked in the lot of a cafe, looking less sparkling than when I last saw 
it, the silver-gray a hint duller. Though maybe that was a mistaken impression on my part: I have this 
convenient tendeney to rework my memories. I dashed into the cafe without a moment's hesitation. 

The place was dark and thick with the strong aroma of coffee. There weren't many voices to be 
heard, only atmospheric baroque musie. I recognized him immediately. He was sitting alone by the 
window, drinking a cafe au lait. And though it was warm enough in there to steam up my glasses, he 
was wearing a black cashmere coat, with his muffler still wrapped around his neck. 

I hedged a second, but then figured I might as well approach the guy. I decided not to say I'd seen 
his car outside; I'd just happened to step in, and by chance there he was. 



"Mind if I sit down?" I asked. 
"Please, not at all," he replied. 

We talked a bit. It wasn't a particularly lively conversation. Clearly, we didn't have much in the 
way of common topics; moreover, his mind seemed to be on something else. Still, he didn't show any 
sign of being put out by my presence. At one point, he mentioned a seaport in Tunisia, then he started 
describing the shrimp they caught there. He wasn't just talking for my sake: He really was serious 
about these shrimp. All the same, like water to the desert, the story didn't go anywhere before it 
dissipated. 

He signaled to the waiter and ordered a second cafe au lait. 
"Say, by the way, how's your barn doing?" I braved the question. 

The trace of a smile came to his lips. "Oh, you still remember?" he said, removing a handkerchief 
from his pocket to wipe his mouth. "Why, sure, I burned it. Burned it nice and clean. Just as 
promised." 

"One right near my house?" 

"Yeah. Really, right by there." 

"When?" 

"Last — when was it? Maybe ten days after I visited your place." 

I told him about how I plotted the barns on my map and ran my daily circuit. "So there's no way I 
could have not seen it," I insisted. 

"Very thorough," he gibed, obviously having his fun. "Thorough and logical. All I can say is, you 
must have missed it. Does happen, you know. Things so close up, they don't even register." 

"It just doesn't make sense." 

He adjusted his tie, then glanced at his watch. "So very, very close," he underscored. "But if you' 11 
excuse me, I've got to be going. Let's talk about it next time, shall we? Can't keep a person waiting. 
Sorry." 

I had no plausible reason to detain the guy any further. 

He stood up, pocketed his cigarettes and lighter, and then remarked, "Oh, by the way, have you 
seen her lately?" 

"No, not at all. Haven't you?" 

"Me, neither. I've been trying to get in touch, but she's never in her apartment and she doesn't 
answer the phone and she hasn't been to her pantomime class the whole while." 

"She must have taken off somewhere. She's been known to do that." 

The guy stared down at the table, hands buried in his pockets. "With no money, for a month and a 
half? As far as making her own way, she hardly has a clue." 

He was snapping his fmgers in his coat pocket. 

'T think I know that giri pretty well, and she absolutely hasn't got yen one. No real friends to speak 
of. An address book fUll of names, but that's all they are. She hasn't got anyone she can depend on. 
No, I take that back, she did trust you. And I' m not saying this out of courtesy. I do believe you' re 
someone special to her. Really, it's enough to make me kind of jealous. And I' m someone who's 



never ever been jealous at all." He gave a little sigh, then eyed his watch again. "But I really must go. 
Be seeing you." 

Right, I nodded, but no words came. The same as always, whenever I was thrown together with this 
guy, I became altogether inarticulate. 

I tried calling her any number of times after that, but her line had apparently been disconnected. 
Which somehow bothered me, so I went to her apartment and encountered a locked door, her mailbox 
stuffed with fliers. The superintendent was nowhere to be found, so I had no way to know if she was 
even living there anymore. I ripped a page from my appointment book, jotted down "Please contact," 
wrote my name, and shoved it into the mailbox. 

Not a word. 

The next time I passed by, the apartment bore the nameplate of another resident. I actually knocked, 
but no one was in. And like before, no superintendent in sight. 

At that, I gave up. This was one year ago. 

She 'd disappeared. 

JJ/VERY MORNING, I still run past those five barns. Not one of them has yet burned down. Nor do I hear of any 
barn fires. Come December, the birds strafe overhead. And I keep getting older. 

Although just now and then, in the depths of the night, FH think about barns burning to the ground. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



The 
l i T T L E 

G R E E N 

m o N St e r 



My HUSBAND LEFT for work as usual, and I couldn't think of anything to do. I sat alone in the chair by the 
window, staring out at the gar den through the gap between the curtains. Not that I had any reason to be 
looking at the garden: There was nothing else for me to do. And I thought that sooner or later, if I sat 
there looking, I might think of something. Of all the many things in the garden, the one I looked at most 
was the oak tree. It was my special favorite. I had planted it when I was a little giri, and watched it 
grow. I thought of it as my old friend. I talked to it all the time in my head. 

That day, too, I was probably talking to the oak tree — I don't remember what about. And I don't 
know how long I was sitting there. The time slips by when F m looking at the garden. It was dark 
before I knew it: I must have been there quite a while. Then, all at once, I heard a sound. It came from 
somewhere far away — a funny, muffled sort of rubbing sort of sound. At first I thought it was coming 
from a place deep inside me, that I was hearing things — a warning from the dark cocoon my body was 
spinning within. I held my breath and listened. Yes. No doubt about it. Little by little, the sound was 
moving closer to me. What was it? I had no idea. But it made my flesh creep. 

The ground near the base of the tree began to bulge upward as if some thick, heavy liquid were 
rising to the surface. Again I caught my breath. Then the ground broke open and the mounded earth 
crumbled away to reveal a set of sharp claws. My eyes locked onto them, and my hands turned into 
clenched fists. Something's going to happen, I said to myself. It's starting now. The claws scraped 
hard at the soil, and soon the break in the earth was an open hole, from which there crawled a little 
green monster. 

Its body was covered with shining green scales. As soon as it emerged from the hole, it shook itself 
until the bits of soil clinging to it dropped away. It had a long, funny nose, the green of which 
gradually deepened toward the tip. The very end was narrow and pointed as a whip, but the beast's 
eyes were exactly like a human's. The sight of them sent a shiver through me. They showed feelings, 
just like your eyes or mine. 

Without hesitation, but moving slowly and deliberately, the monster approached my front door, on 
which it began to knock with the slender tip of its nose. The dry, rapping sound echoed through the 
house. I tiptoed to the back room, hoping the beast would not realize I was there. I couldn't scream. 
Ours is the only house in the area, and my husband wouldn't be coming back from work until late at 
night. I couldn't run out the back door, either, since my house has only the one door, the very one on 
which a horrible green monster was now knocking. I breathed as quietly as I could, pretending not to 
be there, hoping the thing would give up and go away. But it didn't give up. Its nose went from 
knocking to groping at the lock. It seemed to have no trouble at all clicking the lock open, and then the 
door itself opened a crack. Around the edge of the door crept the nose, and then it stopped. For a long 
time it stayed still, like a snake with its head raised, checking conditions in the house. If I had known 
this was going to happen, I could have stayed by the door and cut the nose off, I told myself: The 
kitchen had plenty of sharp knives. No sooner had the thought occurred to me than the creature moved 
past the edge of the door, smiling, as if it had read my mind. Then it spoke, not with a stutter, but 
repeating certain words as if it were still trying to learn them. It wouldn't have done you any good, 
any good, the little green monster said. My nose is like a lizard's tail. It always grows back — stronger 
and longer, stronger and longer. You' d get just the opposite of what what you want want. Then it spun 
its eyes for a long time, like two weird tops. 

Oh, no, I thought to myself. Can it read people's minds? I hate to have anyone know what I' m 
thinking — especially when that someone is a horrid and inscrutable little creature like this. I broke out 
in a cold sweat from head to foot. What was this thing going to do to me? Eat me? Take me down into 



the earth? Oh, well, at least it wasn't so ugly that I couldn't stand looking at it. That was good. It had 
slender, pink little arms and legs jutting out from its green-scaled body and long claws at the ends of 
its hands and feet. They were almost darling, the more I looked at them. And I could see, too, that the 
creature meant me no harm. 

Of course not, it said to me, cocking its head. Its scales clicked against one another when it moved 
— like crammed-together coffee cups rattling on a table when you nudge it. What a terrible thought, 
madam: Of course I wouldn't eat you. No no no. I mean you no harm, no harm, no harm. So I was 
right: It knew exactly what I was thinking. 

Madam madam madam, don't you see? Don't you see? Fve come here to propose to you. From 
deep deep deep down deep down deep. I had to crawl all the way up here up here up. Awful, it was 
awful, I had to dig and dig and di g. Look at how it ruined my claws! I could never have done this if I 
meant you any harm, any harm, any harm. I love you. I love you so much I couldn't stand it anymore 
down deep down deep. I crawled my way up to you, I had to, I had to. They all tried to stop me, but I 
couldn't stand it anymore. And think of the courage that it took, please, took. What if you thought it 
was rude and presumptuous, rude and presumptuous, for a creature like me to propose to you? 

But it is rude and presumptuous, I said in my mind. What a rude little creature you are to come 
seekingmy love! 

A look of sadness came over the monster 's face as soon as I thought this, and its scales took on a 
purple tinge, as if to express what it was feeling. Its entire body seemed to shrink a little, too. I folded 
my arms to watch these changes occurring. Maybe something like this would happen whenever its 
feelings altered. And maybe its awful-looking exterior masked a heart that was as soft and vulnerable 
as a brand-new marshmallow. If so, I knew I could win. I decided to give it a try You are an ugly 
little monster, you know, I shouted in my mind's loudest voice — so loud it made my heart reverberate. 
You are an ugly little monster! The purple of the scales grew deeper, and the thing's eyes began to 
bulge as if they were sucking in all the hatred I was sending them. They protruded from the creature 's 
face like ripe green figs, and tears like red juice ran down from them, splattering on the floor. 

I wasn't afraid of the monster anymore. I painted pictures in my mind of all the cruel things I 
wanted to do to it. I tied it down to a heavy chair with thick wires, and with a needle-nose pliers I 
began ripping out its scales at the roots, one by one. I heated the point of a sharp knife, and with it I 
cut deep grooves in the soft pink flesh of its calves. Over and over, I stabbed a hot soldering iron into 
the bulging figs of its eyes. With each new torture I imagined for it, the monster would lurch and 
writhe and wail in agony as if those things were actually happening to it. It wept its colored tears and 
oozed thick gobs of liquid onto the floor, emitting a gray vapor from its ears that had the fragrance of 
roses. Its eyes sent an unnerving glare of reproach at me. Please, madam, oh please, I beg of you, 
don't think such terrible thoughts! it cried. I have no evil thoughts for you. I would never harm you. 
All I feel for you is love, is love. But I refused to listen. In my mind, I said, Don't be ridiculous! You 
crawled out of my garden. You unlocked my door without permission. You came inside my house. I 
never asked you here. I have the right to think anything I want to. And I continued to do exactly that — 
thinking at the creature increasingly terrible thoughts. I cut and tormented its flesh with every machine 
and tool I could think of, overlooking no method that might exist to torture a living being and make it 
writhe in pain. See, then, you little monster, you have no idea what a woman is. There's no end to the 
number of things I can think of to do to you. But soon the monster 's outlines began to fade, and even 
its strong green nose shriveled up until it was no bigger than a worm Writhing on the floor, the 
monster tried to move its mouth and speak to me, struggling to open its lips as if it wanted to leave me 



some final message, to convey some ancient wisdom, some crucial bit of knowledge that it had 
forgotten to impart to me. Before that could happen, the mouth attained a painflil stillness, and soon it 
went out of focus and disappeared. The monster now looked like nothing more than a pale evening 
shadow. Ali that remained, suspended in the air, were its mournfiil, bloated eyes. That won't do any 
good, I thought to it. You can look all you want, but you can't say a thing. You can't do a thing. Your 
existence is over, finished, done. Soon the eyes dissolved into emptiness, and the room filled with the 
darkness of night. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



F A M I L Y 

A F F a.R 



Itprobablyhappens all the time, but I disliked my kid sister's fiance right from the start. And the less I liked 
him, the more doubts I had about her. I was disappointed in her for the choice she had made. 

Maybe Fmjustnarrow-minded. 

My sister certainly seemed to think so. We didn't talk about my feelings, but she knew I didn't like 
her fiance, and she let her annoyance show. 

"You've got such a narrow view of things," she said. 

At the time, we were talking about spaghetti. She was telling me that I had a narrow view of 
spaghetti. 

This was not all she had in mind, of course. Her fiance was lurking somewhere just beyond the 
spaghetti, and she was really talking about him. We were fighting over himby proxy. 

It all started one Sunday afternoon when she suggested we go out for Italian food. "Fine," I said, 
since I just happened to be in the mood for that. We went to a cute little spaghetti house that had 
recently opened up across from the station. I ordered spaghetti with eggplant and garlic, and she asked 
for pesto sauce. While we waited, I had a beer. So far, so good. It was May, a Sunday, and the 
weather was beautiful. 

The problem started with the spaghetti itself, which was a disaster. The surface of the pasta had an 
unpleasant, floury texture. The center was still hard and uncooked. Even a dog would have turned its 
nose up at the butter they had used. I couldn't eat more than half of what was on my plate, and I asked 
the waitress to take the rest away. 

My sister glanced at me once or twice but didn't say anything at first. Instead, she took her time, 
eating everything they had served her, down to the last thread. I sat there, looking out the window and 
drinking another beer. 

"You didn't have to make such a show of leaving your food," she said when the waitress had taken 
her plate. 

"Yuck." 

"It wasn't that bad. You could have forced yourself." 
"Why should I? It's my stomach, not yours." 

"It's a brand-new restaurant. The cook's probably not used to the kitchen. It wouldn't have killed 
you to give him the benefit of the doubt," she said, and took a sip of the thin, tasteless-looking coffee 
they had brought her. 

"You may be right," I said, "but it only makes sense for a discriminating individual to leave food 
he doesn't like." 

"Well, excuse me, Mr. Know-it-all." 

"What's your problem? That time of the month again?" 

"Oh, shut up. I deserve better than that from you." 

"Take it easy," I said. "You' re talking to a guy who knows exactly when your periods started. You 
were so late, Mom took you to see a doctor." 

"You' re going to get my pocketbook right between the eyes ..." 

She was turning serious, so I shut up. 



"The trouble withyou is, you're so narrow-minded about everything," she said as she added cream 
to her coffee (meaning it was tasteless, after all). "You only see the negative things. You don't even 
try to look at the good points. If something doesn't measure up to your standards, you won't touch it. 
It's so annoying." 

"Maybe so. But it's my life, not yours." 

"And you don't care how much you hurt people. You just let them clean up your mess. Even when 
you masturbate." 

"What the hell are you talking about?" 

"I remember when you were in high school you used to do it in your sheets. The women of the 
family had to clean up after you. The least you could do is masturbate without getting it all over your 
sheets." 

"FH be more careful from now on," I said. "Now, forgive me for repeating myself, but it just so 
happens that I have my own life. I know what I like and I know what I don't like. It's as simple as 
that." 

"Okay, but you don't have to hurt people. Why don't you try a little harder? Why don't you look at 
the good side? Why don't you at least show some restraint? Why don't you grow up?" 

Now she had touched a sore spot. 'T am grown up. I can show restraint. And I can look at the good 
side, too. I'mjust not looking at the same things you are." 

"That's what I mean. You're so arrogant. That's why you haven't got a steady girlfriend. I mean, 
you're twenty-sevenyears old." 

"Of course I have a girlfriend." 

"You mean a body to sleep with. You know F m right. Do you enjoy changing partners every year? 
How about love and understanding and compassion? Without those, what's the point? You might as 
well be masturbating." 

'T don't change partners every year, do I?" 

"Pretty much. You ought to think about your life more seriously, act more like a grownup." 
That marked the end of our conversation. She just tuned out. 

Why had her attitude toward me changed so much over the past year? Until then, she had seemed to 
enjoy being partners with me in my resolutely aimless life-style, and — if Fm not mistaken — she even 
looked up to me to some extent. She had become gradually more critical of me in the months since she 
had begun seeing her fiance. 

This, to me, seemed tremendously unfair. She had been seeing him for a few months, but she and I 
had been "seeing" each other for twenty-three years. We had always gotten along well, practically 
never had a fight. I didn't know a brother and sister who could talk so honestly and openly with each 
other, and not only about masturbation and periods: She knew when I first bought condoms (I was 
seventeen), and I knew when she first bought lace underwear (she was nineteen). 

I had dated her friends (but not slept with them, of course), and she had dated mine (but not slept 
with them, of course — I think). That's just how we were brought up. This excellent relationship of 
ours turned sour in less than a year. The more I thought about it, the angrier it made me. 

She had to buy a pair of shoes at the department store near the station, she said. I left her outside the 
restaurant and went back to our apartment alone. I gave my girlfriend a call, but she wasn't in. Which 



wasn't surprising. Two o'clock on a Sunday afternoon was not the best time to ask a giri for a date. I 
flipped the pages of my address book and tried another giri — a student I had met at some disco. She 
answered the phone. 

"Like to go out for a drink?" 

"You're kidding. It's two o'clock in the afternoon." 

"So what? We'll drink till the sun goes down I know the perfect bar for watching the sunset. You 
can't get good seats if you're not there by three." 

"Are you some kind of connoisseur of sunsets?" 

But still she accepted, probably out of kindness. I picked her up, and we drove out along the shore 
just beyond Yokohama to a bar with a view of the ocean. I drank four glasses of I. W. Harper on the 
rocks, and she had two banana daiquiris (can you believe it?). And we watched the sun go down. 

"Are you going to be okay driving with that much to drink?" she asked. 

"No problem. Where alcohol is concerned, I'munder par." 

'"Under par'?" 

"Four drinks are just enough to bring me up to normal. You haven't got a thing to worry about. Not 
a thing." 

"If you say so ..." 

We drove back to Yokohama, ate, and enjoyed a few kisses in the car. I suggested we go to a hotel, 
but she didn't want to. 

"I' m wearing a tampon." 

"So take it out." 

"Yeah, right. It's my second day." 

And what a day it was. At this rate, I should have just had a date with my girlfriend. But no, this 
was going to be the day I spent a nice, leisurely Sunday with my sister, something we hadn't done for 
a long time. So much for that plan. 

"Sorry," said the giri. "I'mtellingyouthe truth." 

"Never mind. It's notyour fault. Fmto blame." 

"You're to blame for my period?" she asked with an odd look. 

"No, it's just the way things worked out." What a stupid question. 

I drove her to her house in Setagaya. On the way, the clutch started making funny rattling noises. I'd 
probably have to bring it into the garage soon, I thought with a sigh. It was one of those classic days, 
when one thing goes wrong and then everything goes with it. 

"Can I invite you out again soon?" I asked. 

"Onadate? Ortoahotel?" 

"Both," I said with a smile. "The two go together. You know. Like a toothbrush and toothpaste." 
"Maybe. I' 11 think about it." 

"You do that. Thinking is good for you. It keeps you from getting senile." 
"Where do you live? Can I come and visit?" 



"Sony. I live with my sister. We've got rules. I don't bring women home, and she doesn't bring 
men." 

"Yeah, like she's reallyyour sister." 

"It's true. Next time F 11 bring a copy of our lease. Sunday okay?" 
She laughed. "Okay." 

I watched her go in through her gate. Then I started my engine and drove home, listening for those 
clutch noises. 

The apartment was pitch-black. I turned on the light and called my sister 's name, but she wasn't 
there. What the hell was she doing out at ten o'clock at night? I looked for the evening paper but 
couldn't fmd it. Of course. It was Sunday. 

I got a beer from the refrigerator and carried it and a glass into the living room. I switched on the 
stereo and dropped a new Herbie Hancock record on the turntable. Waiting for the music to start, I 
took a long swallow of beer. But nothing came from the speakers. Then I remembered. The stereo had 
gone on the blink three days earlier. The amp had power, but there was no sound. 

This also made it impossible to watch TV I have one of those monitors without any sound circuitry 
of its own. You have to use it with the stereo. 

I stared at my silent TV screen and drank my beer. They were showing an old war movie. 
Rommel's Afrika Korps tanks were fighting in the desert. Their cannons shot silent shells, their 
machine guns shot silent bullets, and people died silently, one after another. 

I sighed for what must have been the sixteenth time that day. 

I had started living with my sister five years earlier, in the spring, when I was twenty-two and she was 
eighteen. I had just graduated from college and taken my first job, and she had just graduated from 
high school and entered college. Our parents had allowed her to go to school in Tokyo on the 
condition that she live with me, a condition we were both glad to accept. They found us a nice, big 
two-bedroom apartment, and I paid half the rent. 

The thought of living with my sister was an almost painless proposition. Not only did we get along 
well, as I mentioned earlier, but our schedules matched well, too. Working for the PR section of an 
appliance manufacturer, I would leave the house fairly late in the morning and come back late at night. 
She used to go out early and come home as the sun was going down. In other words, she was usually 
gone when I woke up and asleep by the time I came back. And since my weekends were mostly taken 
up with dates, I didn't really talk to my sister more than once or twice a week. We wouldn't have had 
time to fight even if we had wanted to, and we didn't invade each other' s privacy. 

I assumed she had her own things going, but I felt it was not my place to say anything. She was 
eighteen, after all. What business was it of mine who she slept with? 

One time, though, I held her hand for a couple of hours — from one to three in the morning, to be 
exact. I found her at the kitchen table, crying, when I got home from work. Narrow-minded and selfish 
as I am, I was smart enough to realize that if she was crying at the kitchen table and not in her room 
she wanted some comforting from me. 

So I sat next to her and held her hand — probably for the first time since elementary school, when 
we went out hunting dragonflies. Her hand was much bigger and stronger than I remembered. 
Obviously. 



She cried for two hours straight, never moving. I could hardly believe the body was capable of 
producing such quantities of tears. Two minutes of crying was all it took to dry me out. 

By the time 3:00 a.m rolled around, though, I had had it. I couldn't keep my eyes open. Now it was 
my turn, as the elder brother, to say something, though giving advice was definitely not my line. 

"I don't want to interfere with the way you live your life," I began. "It's your life, and you should 
live it as youplease." 

She nodded. 

"But I do want to give you one word of advice. Don't carry condoms in your purse. They'll think 
you' re a whore." 

When she heard that, she grabbed the telephone book that was sitting on the table and heaved it at 
me with all her might. 

"What are you doing snooping in my bag!" 

She always threw things when she got mad. Which is why I didn't go on to tell her that I had never 
looked in her bag. 

In any case, it worked. She stopped crying, and I was able to get some sleep. 

Our life-style stayed exactly the same, even after she graduated from college and took a j ob with a 
travel agency. She worked a Standard nine-to-five day, while my schedule became, if anything, 
looser. I'd show up at the office some time before noon, read the newspaper at my desk, eat lunch, 
and finally get serious about doing a little something around two in the afternoon. Later, I'd make 
arrangements with the guys from the ad agency, and we'd go out drinking till after midnight. 

For her first summer vacation, my sister went to California with a couple of friends on a package 
tour put together by her agency. One of the members of the tour group was a computer engineer a year 
her senior, and she started dating him when they came back to Japan. This kind of thing happens all 
the time, but it's not for me. First of all, I hate package tours, and the thought of getting serious about 
somebody you meet in a group like that makes me sick. 

After she started seeing this computer engineer, though, my sister began to glow. She paid a lot 
more attention to appearances, both the apartment's and her own. Until then, she had gone just about 
everywhere in a work shirt and faded jeans and sneakers. Thanks to her new interest in clothing, the 
front closet filled up with her shoes, and all the other closets were overflowing with wire hangers 
from the cleaner's. She was constantly doing laundry and ironing clothes (instead of leaving them to 
pile up in the bathroom like an Amazonian ants' nest), always cooking and cleaning. These were 
dangerous symptoms, I seemed to recall from my own experience. When a woman starts acting like 
this, a man has only one choice: to clear out fast or marry her. 

Then she showed me his picture. She had never done anything like that before. Another dangerous 
symptom. 

Actually, she showed me two pictures. One had been taken on Fisherman's Wharf in San 
Francisco. It showed my sister and the computer engineer standing in front of a swordfish and 
wearing big smiles on their faces. 

"Nice swordfish," I said. 

"Stopjoking. I'm serious." 

"So what should I say?" 



"Don't say anything. This is him'' 

I took the photo again and studied his face. If there was one single type of face in the world 
designed to arouse instant dislike in me, this was it. Worse, something about him reminded me of a 
particular upperclassman in a high-school club of mine, a guy I hated — not a bad-looking type, but 
absolutely empty-headed and a real whiner. He had a memory like an elephant; once he had some 
picky thing on you, he'd never let go. He made up for lack of brains with this phenomenal memory. 

"How many times have you done it with him?" I asked. 

"Don't be stupid," she said, blushing. "You don't have to judge the whole world by your own 
standards. Not everybody i s like you, you know." 

The second photo had been taken after the trip. It showed the computer engineer by himself. He 
wore a leather jacket and was leaning against a big motorcycle, his helmet perched on the saddle. His 
face had exactly the same expression as in San Francisco. Maybe he didn' 't have any other 
expressions. 

"He likes motorcycles," she said. 

"No kidding. I didn't thinkhe put on the leather jacket j ust to have his picture taken." 

Maybe it was another example of my narrow-minded personality, but I could never like motorcycle 
freaks — the way they swagger around, so pleased with themselves. I kept my mouth shut and handed 
the picture back. 

"Well, then," I said. 

"Well, then, what?" 

"Well, then, what comes next?" 

"I don't know. We might get married." 

"Has he proposed?" 

"Sort of. But I haven't given him my answer." 
"I see." 

"Actually, I' m not sure I want to get married. I've just started working, and I think I'd like to take it 
easy, play around a little more. Not go crazy like you, of course ..." 

"That's probably a healthy attitude," I offered. 

"But I don't know, he's really nice. Sometimes I think I'd like to marry him. It's hard." 
I picked up the photos again and looked at them I kept my sigh to myself. 

This conversation happened before Christmas. One morning after New Year's, my mother called 
me at nine o'clock. I was brushing my teeth to Bruce Springsteen's "Born in the U.S.A." 

She asked if I knew the man my sister was seeing. 

I said I didn't. 

She said she had gotten a letter from my sister asking if she could bring him home two weeks from 
Saturday. 

'T suppose she wants to marry him," I said. 

"That's why F m trying to fmd out from you what kind of man he is. I'd like to learn something 
about him before I actually meet him." 



"Well, Fve never met the guy. He's a year older than she is and he's a computer engineer. Works at 
one of those three-letter places — IBM or NEC or TNT, I don't know. Fve seen his picture. A nothing 
kind of face. Not my taste, but then I don't have to marry him." 

"Where did he graduate from? Does he have a house?" 

"How should I know?" 

"Well, would you please meet him and find out about these things?" 
"No way. I'm busy. Ask him yourself when you meet him in two weeks." 

Finally, though, I had no choice but to meet my sister's computer engineer. She was going to pay a 
formal visit to his family's home the following Sunday, and she wanted me to come with her. I put on 
a white shirt and a tie and my most conservative suit. They lived in an imposing house in the middle 
of a nice residential neighborhood in Meguro. The 500CC Honda I had seen in the photo was parked 
in front of the garage. 

"Nice swordfish." 

"Please, " she said, "none of your stupid jokes. Ali Fm asking is that you restrain yourself for one 
day." 

"Yes, ma'am." 

His parents were fme people, very proper — maybe a little too proper. The father was an oil- 
company executive. Since my father owned a chain of gas stations in Shizuoka, this was by no means 
an unthinkable match. The mother served us tea on an elegant tray. 

I offered the father my calling card, and he gave me his. Then I managed to dredge up all the proper 
phrases to explain that I was here to represent my parents, who were unfortunately unable to attend, 
owing to a previous engagement; we hoped that on some future date acceptable to both parties they 
might be allowed to pay their formal respects. 

He replied that his son had told him much about my sister and that, meeting her now, he saw that 
she was far lovelier than his son deserved. He knew we came from an upstanding family, and as far 
as he and his wife were concerned they had no objection to the "present discussions." I imagined he 
must have had our family background thoroughly investigated, but he couldn't possibly have found out 
that my sister had not had her first period until she was sixteen and that she was chronically 
constipated. 

Once the formalities ended without mishap, the father poured me a brandy — pretty decent stuff. As 
we drank, we talked about jobs of various kinds. My sister poked me now and then with the toe of her 
slipper, warning me not to drink too much. 

The computer engineer, meanwhile, said nothing, but sat next to his father all the while with a tense 
expression on his face. You could see right away that he was under his father 's thumb, at least while 
he remained in this house. It figured. The sweater he was wearing had a strange pattern of a kind I had 
never seen before, and its color clashed with his shirt. Why couldn't she have found somebody a little 
sharper? 

The conversation reached a lull around four o'clock, and we stood up to leave. The computer 
engineer saw us as far as the station. "How about a cup of tea?" he urged. I didn't want tea and I 
certainly didn't want to sit at the same table with a guy wearing such a weird sweater, but it would 
have been awkward for me to refuse, so the three of us went into a nearby coffeehouse. 



They ordered coffee and I ordered beer, but the place didn't serve beer so I ordered coffee, too. 
"Thanks so much for coming today," he said. "I appreciate your help." 

"Just doing what's expected of me," I said simply "No thanks necessary." I had lost the energy to 
make wisecracks. 

"She's told me so much about you — Brother." 

Brother!? 

I scratched an earlobe with the handle of my coffee spoon and returned it to the saucer. My sister 
gave me another healthy kick, but its meaning seemed lost on the computer engineer. Maybe he only 
got jokes in binary notation. 

"I envy the two of you being so close," he said. 

"We kick each other in the leg when we're happy," I said. 

He took this with a puzzled expression. 

"It's supposed to be a j oke," grumbled my sister. "He likes to say things like that." 

"Just a j oke," I concurred. "We share the housework. She does the laundry and I do the jokes." 

The computer engineer — his name was Noboru Watanabe — gave a little laugh, as though this had 
solved a problem for him 

"You two are so bright and cheery," he said. "That's the kind of household I want to have. Bright 
and cheery is best." 

"See?" I said to my sister. "Bright and cheery is best. You' re too uptight." 

"Not if the jokes are funny," she said. 

"If possible, we'd like to marry in the autumn," said Noboru Watanabe. 

"Autumn is the best time for a wedding," I said. "You can still invite the squirrels and bears." 

He laughed. She didn't. She was starting to look seriously angry. I excused myself and left. 

Back at the apartment, I phoned my mother and summed up the afternoon for her. 

"He's not such a bad guy," I said, scratching my ear. 

"What do you mean by that?" she asked. 

"He's a serious individual. At least, more serious than I am" 

"But you' re not serious at all." 

"F m glad to hear that. Thanks," I said, looking at the ceiling. 

"So, where did he graduate from?" 

"Graduate?" 

"Where did he go to college?" 

"Ask him yourself," I said, and hung up. I was sick of all this. I took a beer from the refrigerator 
and drank it alone. 

1 HE DAY AFTER the spaghetti argument with my sister, I woke up at eight-thirty. It was another beautiful, 
cloudless day, just like yesterday. In fact, it was like a continuation of yesterday, and my life seemed 
to be starting up again, too, after a halftime break. 



I threw my sweat-dampened pajamas into the hamper, took a shower, and shaved. While shaving, I 
thought about the giri I hadn't quite been able to get last night. Ah, well, it just wasn't in the cards. I 
did my best. F 11 have plenty more opportunities. Like next Sunday. 

I toasted two slices of bread and warmed up some coffee. I wanted to listen to an FM station but 
remembered the stereo was broken. Instead, I read book reviews in the paper and ate my toast. Not 
one of the books reviewed was something I thought I'd want to read: a novel on "the sex life of an old 
Jewish man, mingling fantasy and reality," a historical study of treatments for schizophrenia, a 
complete expose of the 1907 Ashio Copper Mine pollution incident. It'd be a lot more fun to sleep 
with the captain of a girls' softball team. Fhe newspaper probably chose books like this just to annoy 
us. 

Munching on my toast, I laid the paper on the table; then I noticed a memo under the jam jar. In my 
sister's tiny handwriting, it said that she had invited Noboru Watanabe for dinner this Sunday and she 
expected me to be there. 

I finished eating, brushed the crumbs off my shirt, and put the dishes in the sink. Fhen I called the 
travel agency. My sister took the phone and said, "I can't talk right now. F 11 call you back in ten 
minutes." 

The call came twenty minutes later. In the meantime, I had done forty-three push-ups, trimmed all 
twenty fmger-and toenails, picked out my shirt, necktie, jacket, and pants for the day, brushed my 
teeth, combed my hair, and yawned twice. 

"Did you see my note?" she asked. 

"Yup. Sorry, but Fve got a date this Sunday. Made it a long time ago. If I had known, I would have 
left the day open. Too bad." 

"You expect me to believe that? I know what you' re going to do: go somewhere and do something 
with some giri whose name you hardly know. Well, you can do that on Saturday." 

"Saturday I have to be in the studio all day with an electric-blanket commercial. We're busy these 
days." 

"So cancel your date." 

"I can't. She '11 charge me a cancellation fee. And things are at a pretty delicate stage with her." 
"Meaning things are not so delicate in my case?" 

"No, I don't mean that at all," I said, holding the necktie I had chosen next to the shirt hanging on a 
chairback. "But don't forget: We've got this rule not to trespass on each other's lives. You eat dinner 
with your fiance and I' 11 have a date with my girlfriend. What' s wrong with that?" 

"You know what's wrong with that. Look how long it's been since you've seen him. You met him 
once, and that was four months ago. It's just not right. Every time I arrange something, you run away. 
Don't you see how rude you' re being? He's your sister's fiance. It wouldn't kill you to have dinner 
with him once." 

She had a point there, so I kept quiet. In fact, I had been trying to avoid crossing paths with him, but 
to me it seemed the most natural thing in the world to do. We had nothing in common to talk about, and 
it was exhausting to tell jokes using my sister as a simultaneous interpreter. 

"Will you please just join us this once? If you'll do that much for me, I promise I won't interfere 
with your sex life till the end of the summer." 



"My sex life is pretty feeble at the moment. It might not make it through the summer." 
"You will be home for dinner this Sunday, though, won't you?" 
"How can I say no?" 

"He'll probably fix the stereo for us. He's good at that." 
"Good with his hands, huh?" 
"You and your dirty mind," she said, and hung up. 
I put on my necktie and went to work. 

The weather was clear all that week. Each day was like a continuation of the previous one. 
Wednesday night, I called my girlfriend to say we couldn't get together on the weekend. She was 
understandably annoyed: We hadn't seen each other for three weeks. Receiver still in hand, I dialed 
the college giri I had made a date with for Sunday, but she was out. She was out again on Thursday 
and on Friday. 

My sister woke me up at eight o'clock on Sunday morning. "Get out of bed, will you? I have to 
wash the sheets." 

She stripped the sheets and pillowcase and ordered me out of my pajamas. My only refuge was the 
bathroom, where I showered and shaved. She was getting to be more and more like our mother. 
Women are like salmon: In the end, they all swim back to the same place. 

After the shower, I put on a pair of shorts and a faded T-shirt, and with long, long yawns I drank a 
glass of orange juice. My veins still carried some of last night's alcohol; opening the Sunday paper 
would have been too much for me. I nibbled a few soda crackers from the box on the kitchen table and 
decided that that was all the breakfast I needed. 

My sister threw the sheets into the washing machine and cleaned our two rooms. Next, she put 
some soap and water in a bucket and washed down the walls and floors of the living room and 
kitchen. I sprawled on the sofa all this time, looking at the nude photos in a copy of Hustler that a 
friend of mine in the States had gotten past the postal censors. Amazing, the variety in shape and size 
of the female sex organ. They can be as difTerent as people's heights or IQs. 

"Stop hanging around and do some shopping for me, will you?" She handed me a list crammed full 
of things to buy. "And please hide that magazine. He's very proper." 

I laid the magazine down and studied the list. Lettuce, tomatoes, celery, French dressing, smoked 
salmon, mustard, onions, soup stock, potatoes, parsley, three steaks . . . 

"Steaks? I just had steak last night. Why don't you make croquettes?" 

"Maybejw/ had steak last night, but we didn't. Don't be so selfish. You can't serve croquettes 
when you have a guest for dinner." 

"If some giri invited me to her house and fed me fresh-fried croquettes, I'd be deeply moved. With 
a nice pile of julienned white cabbage, a bowl of miso clam soup . . . that' s real life." 

"Maybe so, but I have decided on steak. Next time I' 11 feed you croquettes till you drop, but today 
you' 11 have to make do with steak. Please." 

"That' 11 be fine," I told her reassuringly. I can be a pain in the neck, but finally I' m a kind, 
understanding human being. 

I went to the neighborhood supermarket and bought everything on the list. On the way home, I 



stopped off at a liquor store and bought a 4,500-yen bottle of Chablis — my gift to the young couple. 
Only a kind, understanding human being would think of something like that. 

At home, I found a blue Ralph Lauren polo shirt and a spotless pair of cotton pants neatly folded on 
the bed. 

"Change into those," she said. 

With another silent sigh, I did as I was told. I couldn't have said anything to her that would have 
brought me back my pleasantly messy, peacefiil Sunday. 

N OBORU WATANABE came riding up at three. Astride his trusty cycle, he arrived with the gentle zephyrs of 
springtime. I caught the ominous put-put of his 500CC Honda from a quarter mile away. I stuck my 
head out over the edge of the balcony to see him parking next to the entrance of our apartment house 
and taking off his helmet. Fortunately, once he removed that white dome with its STP sticker, his 
outfit today approached that of a normal human being: overstarched button-down check shirt, baggy 
white pants, and brown loafers with tassels — though the color of the shoes and belt didn't match. 

"I think your friend from Fisherman's Wharf is here," I said to my sister, who was peeling potatoes 
at the kitchen sink. 

"Keep him company for a while, will you? I' 11 finishup here." 

"Bad idea. I don't know what to talk to him about. You talk to him — FH do this." 

"Don't be silly. It wouldn't look right for me to leave you in the kitchen. You talk to him" 

The beli rang, and I opened the door to find Noboru Watanabe standing there. I showed him into the 
living room and settled him onto the couch. His gift for the evening was a selection of Baskin- 
Robbins's thirty-one flavors, but cramming it into our tiny, already-stuffed freezer took a major effort 
on my part. What a pain. Of all the things he could have brought, why did he have to pick ice cream? 

"How about a beer?" 

"No thanks. I think F m allergic to alcohol. One glass is enough to make me sick." 
"I once drank a whole washbasinflil of beer on a bet with some college friends." 
"What did it do to you?" 

"My pee stank beer for two whole days. And I kept burping up this — " 

"Why don't you have Noboru look at the stereo set?" interjected my sister, who had come along in 
the nick of time, as if she had smelled smoke, with two glasses of orange juice. 

"Good idea," said Noboru. 

"I hear you' re good with your hands," I said. 

"It's true," he confessed unabashedly "I always used to enjoy making plastic models and radio 
kits. Anytime something broke inthe house, I'd fixit. What' s wrong with the stereo?" 

"No sound," I said. I turned on the amp and put on a record to show him 

He crouched down in front of the stereo like a mongoose ready to spring. After fiddling with all the 
switches, he announced, "It's defmitely in the amplifier system, but it's not internal." 

"How canyoutell?" 

"By the inductive method." 



Oh, sure, the inductive method. 

He pulled out the mini-preamp and the power amplifier, removed all the cords connecting them, 
and began to examine each one. While he was busy with this, I took a can of Budweiser from the 
refrigerator and drank it alone. 

"It must be fun to be able to drink alcohol," he said as he poked at a plug with a mechanical pencil. 

"I wonder," I said. "Fve been doing it so long I wouldn't have anything to compare it with." 

"I' ve been practicing a little." 

"Practicing drinking?" 

"Yes. Is there something odd about that?" 

"No, not at all. You should start with white wine. Put some in a big glass with ice, cut it with 
Perrier and a squeeze of lemon juice. That' s what I drink instead of fruit juice." 

"F 11 give it a try," he said. "Aha! I thought so!" 

"What' s that?" 

"The connecting cords between the preamp and the power amp. The connection's been broken at 
the plugs on both channels. This kind of pin plug can't take much movement. In addition to which, 
they're cheaply made. I' 11 bet somebody moved the amplifier recently." 

'T did the other day, when I was cleaning," said my sister. 

"That' s it." 

She looked at me. "We got this thing fromyour company. It's their fault for using such weakparts." 
"Well, / didn't make it," I muttered. 'T just do the commercials." 

"Don't worry," said Noboru Watanabe. "I can fix it right away if you' ve got a soldering iron." 
"A soldering iron? Not in this house." 

"Never mind. I' 11 zip out and buy one. You really ought to have a soldering iron in the house. They 
come in handy." 

"Yeah, IT1 bet. But I don't know where there's a hardware store." 
"I do. I passed one on the way." 

I stuck my head out over the balcony again and watched Noboru Watanabe strap on his helmet, 
mount his bike, and disappear around a corner. 

"He's so nice," sighed my sister. 

"Yeah, a real honey." 

N OBORU WATANABE finished repairing the pin plugs before five o'clock. He asked to hear some easy-listening 
vocals, so my sister put on a Julio Iglesias record. Since when did we have crap like that in the 
house? 

Noboru asked me, "What kind of music do you like?" 

"Oh, I just love stuff like this," I blurted out. "You know: Bruce Springsteen, Jeff Beck, the Doors." 
"Funny, Fve never heard of any of those. Are they like Julio?" 
"Yeah, a lot like Julio." 



He talked about the new computer system that his project team was currently developing. It was 
designed to generate an instantaneous diagram showing the most effective method for returning trains 
to the depot after an accident. In fact, it sounded like a great idea, but the principle made about as 
much sense to me as Finnish verb conjugations. While he raved on and on, I nodded at appropriate 
times and thought about women — like who I should take where to drink what on my next day off, 
including where we would eat and the hotel we'd use. I must have an inborn liking for such things. 
Just as there are those who like to make plastic models and draw train diagrams, I like to get drunk 
with women and sleep with them. It was a matter of Destiny, something that surpassed all human 
understanding. 

Around the time I was fmishing my fourth beer, dinner was ready: smoked salmon, vichyssoise, 
steak, salad, and fried potatoes. As always, my sister's cooking was pretty good. I opened the Chablis 
and drank it alone. 

As he sliced his tenderloin, Noboru Watanabe asked me, "Why did you take a job with an 
appliance manufacturer? I gather you're not particularly interested in electrical devices." 

My sister answered for me. "He's not particularly interested in anything that's of benefit to society. 
He would have taken a job anywhere. It just so happened he had an in with that particular company." 

"I couldn't have said it any better myself," I chimed in. 

"All he thinks about is having fun. It never occurs to him to concentrate on anything seriously, to 
make himself a better person." 

"Yours truly, the summer grasshopper." 

"He gets a kick out of smirking at those who do choose to live seriously." 

"Now, there you're wrong," I interjected. "What I do has nothing to do with what anybody else 
does. I just go along burning my own calories in accordance with my own ideas about things. What 
other people do doesn't concern me. I don't smirk at them; I don't even look at them. I may be a good- 
for-nothing, but at least I don't get in the way of other people." 

"That's not true!" cried Noboru Watanabe in something like a reflex action. "You're not a good- 
for-nothing!" He must have been brought up well. 

"Thank you," I said, raising my wineglass to him. "And by the way, congrarulations on your 
engagement. Sorry to be the only one drinking." 

"We're planning to have the ceremony in October," he said. "Probably too late to invite the 
squirrels and bears." 

"Not to worry," I said. Incredible, he was making jokes! 

"So, where will you go on your honeymoon? I suppose you can get discount fares?" 
"Hawaii," my sister answered curtly. 

We talked for a while about airplanes. Having just read several books on the crash in the Andes, I 
brought up that topic. 

"When they ate human flesh, they would roast it in the sun on pieces of aluminum from the 
airplane." 

My sister stopped eating and glared at me. "Why do you have to talk about such awful things at the 
dinner table? Do you say things like that when you're eating with girls you're trying to seduce?" 



Like a guest invited to dinner by a feuding married couple, Noboru Watanabe tried to come 
between us by asking me, "Have you ever thought of marrying?" 

"Never had the chance," I said as I was about to put a chunk of fried potato in my mouth. "I had to 
raise my little sister without any help, and then came the long years of war ..." 

"War? Whatwar?" 

"It's just another one of his stupid jokes," said my sister, shaking the bottle of salad dressing. 

"Just another one of my stupid jokes," I added. "But the part about not having had the chance is 
true. Fve always been a narrow-minded guy, and I never used to wash my socks, so I was never able 
to fmd a nice giri who wanted to spend her life with me. Unlike you." 

"Was there something wrong with your socks?" asked Noboru Watanabe. 

"That's a joke, too," my sister explained wearily. "I wash his socks, at least, every day." 

Noboru Watanabe nodded and laughed for one and a half seconds. I was determined to make him 
laugh for three seconds next time. 

"But she 's been spending her life with you, hasn't she?" he said, gesturing toward my sister. 

"Well, after all, she 's my sister." 

"And we've stayed together because you do anything you please and I don't say a thing. But that's 
not a real life. In a real, grown-up, adult life, people confront each other honestly I' m not saying the 
past five years with you haven't been fun. It's been a free and easy time for me. But lately, Fve come 
to see that it's not a real life. It hasn't got — oh, I don't know — the feel of what real life is all about. 
All you think about is yourself, and if somebody tries to have a serious conversation with you, you 
make fun of them." 

"Deep down, I'mreally a shy person." 

"No, you' re just plain arrogant." 

"I' m shy and arrogant," I explained to Noboru Watanabe as I poured myself more wine. "I have this 
shy, arrogant way of returning trains to the depot after an accident." 

"I think I see what you mean," he said, nodding. "But do you know what I think? I think that after 
you' re alone — I mean, after she and I get married — that you are going to start wanting to get married, 
too." 

"You may be right," I said. 

"Really?" my sister piped up. "If you're really thinking about getting married, Fve got a good 
friend, a nice giri, I'd be glad to introduce you." 

"Sure. When the time comes," I said. "Too dangerous now." 

When dinner was over, we moved to the living room for coffee. This time my sister put on a Willie Nelson 
record — maybe one small step up from Julio Iglesias. 

My sister was in the kitchen, cleaning up, when Noboru Watanabe said to me with an air of 
confidentiality, "To tell you the truth, I wanted to stay single until I was closer to thirty, like you. But 
when I met her, all I could think of was getting married." 

"She 's a good kid," I said. "She can be stubborn and a little constipated, but I really think you've 
made the right choice." 



"Still, the idea of getting married is kind of frightening, don't you think?" 

"Well, if you make an effort to always look at the good side, always think about the good things, 
there's nothing to be afraid of. If something bad comes up, you can think again at that point." 

"You may be right." 

"F m good at giving advice to others." 

I went to the kitchen and told my sister I would be going out for a walk. "I won't come backbefore 
ten o'clock, so the two of you can relax and enjoy yourselves. The sheets are fresh." 

"Is that all you think about?" she said with an air of disgust, but she didn't try to stop me from going 
out. 

I went back to the living room and told Noboru Watanabe that I had an errand to run and might be 
late getting back. 

"I' m glad we had a chance to talk," he said. "Please be sure to visit us often after we're married." 
"Thanks," I said, momentarily shutting down my imagination. 

"Don't you dare drive," my sister called out to me as I was leaving. "You've had too much to 
drink." 

"Don't worry. Fll walk." 

It was a little before eight when I entered a neighborhood bar. I sat at the counter, drinking an I. W. 
Harper on the rocks. The TV behind the bar was tuned to a Giants-Swallows game. The sound was 
off, and instead they had a Cyndi Lauper record going. The pitchers were Nishimoto and Obana, and 
the Swallows were ahead, 3-2. There was something to be said for watching TV with the sound off. 

I had three whiskeys while I watched the ball game. It was the bottom of the seventh, score tied 3- 
3, when the broadcast ended at nine o'clock and the set was switched off. Two seats away from me 
was a giri around twenty I had seen there a few times. She had been watching the game, too, so I 
started talking to her about baseball. 

Tma Giants fan," she said. "Which team do you like?" 

"They' re all the same to me. I just like to watch themplay." 

"What's the fun of that? How can you get excited about the game?" 

'T don't have to get excited. I'm not playing. They are." 

I had two more whiskeys on the rocks and treated her to two daiquiris. She was a major in 
commercial design at Tokyo University of the Arts, so we talked about art in advertising. At ten, we 
moved on to a bar with more comfortable seats, where I had a whiskey and she had a grasshopper. 
She was pretty drunk by this time, and so was I. At eleven, I accompanied her to her apartment, where 
we had sex as a matter of course, the way they give you a cushion and a cup of tea at an inn. 

"Put the light out," she said, so I did. From her window you could see a big Nikon ad tower. A TV 
next door was blasting the day's pro-baseball results. What with the darkness and my drunkenness, I 
hardly knew what I was doing. You couldn't call it sex. I just moved my penis and discharged some 
semen. 

As soon as the moderately abbreviated act was fmished, she went to sleep as if she couldn't wait 
any longer to be unconscious. Without even bothering to wipe up properly, I got dressed and left. The 
hardest thing was picking out my polo shirt and underpants from among her stuff in the dark. 



Outside, my alcoholic high tore through me like a midnight freight. I felt like shit. My joints creaked 
like the Tin Woodman's in The Wizard of Oz. I bought a can of juice from a vending machine to sober 
me up, but the second I drank it down I vomited the entire contents of my stomach onto the road — the 
corpses of my steak and smoked salmon and lettuce and tomatoes. 

How many years had it been since I last vomited from drinking? What the hell was I doing these 
days? The same thing over and over. But each repetition was worse than the one before. 

Then, with no connection at all, I thought about Noboru Watanabe and the soldering iron he had 
bought me. "You really ought to have a soldering iron in the house. They come in handy," he had said. 

What a wholesome idea, I said to him mentally as I wiped my lips with a handkerchief. Now, 
thanks to you, my house is equipped with a soldering iron. But because of that damned soldering iron, 
my house doesn't feel like my house any longer. 

That' s probably because I have such a narrow personality. 

Itwasafter midnight by the time I got home. The motorcycle was, of course, no longer parked by the front 
entrance. I took the elevator to the fourth floor, unlocked the apartment door, and went in. Everything 
was pitch-black except for a small fluorescent light above the sink. My sister had probably gotten fed 
up and gone to bed. I couldn't blame her. 

I poured myself a glass of orange juice and emptied it in one gulp. I used lots of soap in the shower 
to wash the foul-smelling sweat from my body, and then I did a thorough job of brushing my teeth. My 
face in the bathroom mirror was enough to give me chills. I looked like one of those middle-aged men 
you see on the last trains from downtown, sprawling drunk on the seats and fouling themselves with 
their own vomit. My skin was rough, my eyes looked sunken, and my hair had lost its sheen. 

I shook my head and turned out the bathroom light. With nothing on but a towel wrapped around my 
waist, I went to the kitchen and drank some tap water. Something will work out tomorrow, I thought. 
And if not, then tomorrow F 11 do some thinking. Ob-la-di, ob-la-da, life goes on. 

"You were so late tonight," came my sister 's voice out of the gloom. She was sitting on the living- 
room couch, drinking a beer alone. 

'T was drinking," I said. 

"You drink too much." 

"Iknow." 

I got a beer from the refrigerator and sat down across from her. 

For a while, neither of us said anything. We sat there, occasionally tipping back our beer cans. The 
leaves of the potted plants on the balcony fluttered in the breeze, and beyond them floated the misty 
semicircle of the moon. 

"Just to let you know, we didn't do it," she said. 

"Do what?" 

"Do anything. Something got on my nerves. I just couldn't do it." 
"Oh." I seemto lose the power of speech on half-moon nights. 
"Aren't you going to ask what got on my nerves?" 
"What got on your nerves?" 



"This room! This place! I just couldn't do it here." 
"Oh." 

"Hey, is something wrong with you? Are you feeling sick?" 
"Fmtired. EvenI get tired sometimes." 

She looked at me without a word. I drained the last sip of my beer and rested my head on the seat 
back, eyes closed. 

"Was it our fault? Did we make you tired?" 

"No way," I said with my eyes still closed. 

"Are you too tired to talk?" she asked in a tiny voice. 

I straightened up and looked at her. Then I shook my head. 

"F m worried. Did I say something terrible to you today? Something about you yourself, or about 
the way you live?" 

"Not at all," I said. 

"Really?" 

"Everything you've said lately has been right on the mark. So don't worry. But what's bothering 
you now, all of a sudden?" 

"I don't know, it just sort of popped into my mind after he left, while I was waiting for you. I 
wondered if I hadn't gone too far." 

I got two cans of beer from the refrigerator, switched on the stereo, and put on the Richie Beirach 
Trio at very low volume. It was the record I listened to whenever I came home drunk in the middle of 
the night. 

"I'm sure you're a little confused," I said. "These changes in life are like changes in the barometric 
pressure. I'm kind of confused, too, in my own way." 

She nodded. 

"Am I being hard on you?" she asked. 

"Everybody's hard on somebody," I said. "But if I'm the one you chose to be hard on, you made the 
right choice. So don't let it worry you." 

"Sometimes, I don't know, it scares me. The future." 

"You have to make an effort to always look at the good side, always think about the good things. 
Then you've got nothing to be afraid of. If something bad comes up, you do more thinking at that 
point." I gave her the same speech I had givenNoboru Watanabe. 

"But what if things don't work out the way you want them to?" 

"If they don't work out, that' s when you think again." 

She gave a little laugh. "You're as strange as ever." 

"Say, can I ask you one question?" I yanked open another can of beer. 

"Sure." 

"How many men did you sleep with before him?" 

She hesitated a moment before holding up two fmgers. "Two." 



"And one was your age, and the other was an older man?" 
"How did you know?" 

"It's a pattern." I took another swig of beer. "I haven't been fooling around for nothing all these 
years. Fve learned that much." 

"So, Fmtypical." 

"Let'sjust say 'healtby.' " 

"How many girls have you slept with?" 

"Twenty-six. I counted them up the other day. There were twenty-six I could remember. There 
might be another ten or so I can't remember. F m not keeping a diary or anything." 

"Why do you sleep with so many girls?" 

"I don't know," I answered honestly "I guess F 11 have to stop at some point, but I can't seem to 
figure out how." 

We remained silent for a while, alone with our own thoughts. From the distance came the sound of 
a motorcycle's exhaust, but it couldn't have been Noboru Watanabe's. Not at one o'clock in the 
morning. 

"Tell me," she said, "what do youreally thinkof him?" 

"Noboru Watanabe?" 

"Uh-huh." 

"He's not a bad guy, I guess. Just not my type. Funny taste in clothes, for one thing." I thought about 
it some more and said, "There' s nothing wrong in having one guy like him in every family." 

"That's what I think. And then there's you: this person I call my brother. I' m very fond of you, but if 
everybody were like you the world would probably be a terrible place!" 

"You may be right." 

We drank what was left of the beer and withdrew to our separate rooms. My sheets were new and 
clean and tight. I stretched out on top of them and looked through the curtain at the moon Where were 
we headed? I wondered. But I was far too tired to think very deeply about such things. When I closed 
my eyes, sleep floated down on me like a dark, silent net. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



A 

W i N D O W 



Greetings, 

The winter cold diminishes with each passing day, and now the sunlight hints at the subtle scent of 
springtime. I trust that you are well. 

Your recent letter was a pleasure to read. The passage on the relationship between hamburger steak 
and nutmeg was especially well written, I felt: so rich with the genuine sense of daily living. How 
vividly it conveyed the warm aromas of the kitchen, the lively tapping of the knife against the cutting 
board as it sliced through the onion! 

In the course of my reading, your letter filled me with such an irrepressible desire for hamburger 
steak that I had to go to a nearby restaurant and have one that very night. In fact, the particular 
neighborhood establishment in question offers eight different varieties of hamburger steak; Texas- 
style, Hawaiian-style, Japanese-style, and the like. Texas-style is big. Period. It would no doubt come 
as a shock to any Texans who might find their way to this part of Tokyo. Hawaiian-style is garnished 
with a slice of pineapple. California-style ... I don't remember. Japanese-style is smothered with 
grated daikon. The place is smartly decorated, and the waitresses are all pretty, with extremely short 
skirts. 

Not that I had made my way there for the express purpose of studying the restaurant's interior decor 
or the waitresses' legs. I was there for one reason only, and that was to eat hamburger steak — not 
Texas-style or California-style or any other style, but plain, simple hamburger steak. 

Which is what I told the waitress. "I'm sorry," she replied, "but such-and- such- style hamburger 
steak i s the only kind we have here." 

I couldn't blame the waitress, of course. She hadn't set the menu. She hadn't chosen to wear this 
uniform that revealed so much thigh each time she cleared a dish from a table. I smiled at her and 
ordered a Hawaiian-style hamburger steak. As she pointed out, I merely had to set the pineapple aside 
when I ate the steak. 

What a strange world we live in! All I want is a perfectly ordinary hamburger steak, and the only 
way I can have it at this particular point in time is Hawaiian-style without pineapple. 

Your own hamburger steak, I gather, is the normal kind. Thanks to your letter, what I wanted most 
of all was an utterly normal hamburger steak made by you. 

By contrast, the passage on the National Railways' automatic ticket machines struck me as a bit 
superficial. Your angle on the problem is a good one, to be sure, but the reader can't vividly grasp the 
scene. Don't try so hard to be the penetrating observer. Writing is, after all, a makeshift thing. 

Your overall score on this newest letter is 70. Your style is improving slowly but surely. Don't be 
impatient. Just keep working as hard as you have been all along. I look forward to your next letter. 
Won't it be nice when spring really comes? 

RS. Thankyou for the box of assorted cookies. They are delicious. The Society's rules, however, 
strictly forbid personal contact beyond the exchange of letters. I must askyou to restrainyour kindness 
in the future. 

Nevertheless, thank you once again. 

I kept this part- time j ob going for a year. I was twenty-two at the time. 

I ground out thirty or more letters like this every month at two thousand yen per letter for a strange 
little company in the Iidabashi district that called itself "The Pen Society." 



"You, too, can learn to write captivating letters," boasted the company's advertisements. New 
"members" paid an initiation fee and monthly dues, in return for which they could write four letters a 
month to The Pen Society. We "Pen Masters" would answer their letters with letters of our own, such 
as the one quoted above, containing corrections, comments, and guidance for future improvement. I 
had gone for a job interview after seeing an ad posted in the student office of the literature 
department. At the time, certain events had led me to delay my graduation for a year, and my parents 
had informed me that they would consequently be decreasing my monthly support. For the first time in 
my life, I was faced with having to make a living. In addition to the interview, I was asked to write 
several compositions, and a week later I was hired. Then came a week of training in how to make 
corrections, offer guidance, and other tricks of the trade, none of which was very difficult. 

Ali Society members are assigned to Pen Masters of the opposite sex. I had a total of twenty-four 
members, ranging in age from fourteen to fifty-three, the majority in the twenty-five-to-thirty-five 
range. Which is to say, most of them were older than I was. The first month, I panicked: The women 
were far better writers than I was, and they had a lot more experience as correspondents. I had hardly 
written a serious letter in my life, after all. I' m not quite sure how I made it through that first month. I 
was in a constant cold sweat, convinced that most of the members in my charge would demand a new 
Pen Master — a privilege touted in the Society' s rules. 

The month went by, and not one member raised a complaint about my writing. Far from it. The 
owner said I was very popular. Two more months went by, and it even began to seem that my charges 
were improving thanks to my "guidance." It was weird. These women looked up to me as their 
teacher with complete trust. When I realized this, it enabled me to dash oflf my critiques to them with 
far les s effort and anxiety. 

I didn't realize it at the time, but these women were lonely (as were the male members of the 
Society). They wanted to write but they had no one to write to. They weren't the type to send fan 
letters to a deejay. They wanted something more personal — even if it had to come in the form of 
corrections and critiques. 

And so it happened that I spent a part of my early twenties like a crippled walrus in a warmish 
harem of letters. 

And what amazingly varied letters they were! Boring letters, funny letters, sad letters. 
Unfortunately, I couldn't keep any of them (the rules required us to return all letters to the company), 
and this happened so long ago that I can' t recall them in detail, but I do remember them as filled to 
overflowing with life in all its aspects, from the largest of questions to the tiniest of trivia. And the 
messages they were sending seemed to me — to me, a twenty-two-year-old college student — strangely 
divorced from reality, seemed at times to be utterly meaningless. Nor was this due solely to my own 
lack of life experience. I realize now that the reality of things is not something you convey to people 
but something you make. It is this that gives birth to meaning. I didn't know it then, of course, and 
neither did the women. This was surely one of the reasons that everything in their letters struck me as 
oddly two-dimensional. 

When it came time for me to leave the job, all the members in my care expressed their regret. And 
though, quite frankly, I was beginning to feel that I had had enough of this endless job of letter writing, 
I felt sorry, too, in a way. I knew that I would never again have so many people opening themselves to 
me with such simple honesty. 



Hamburger steak. I did actually have the opportunity to eat a hamburger steak made by the woman to whom 
the earlier-quoted letter was addressed. 

She was thirty-two, no children, husband worked for a company that was generally considered the 
fifth-best-known in the country. When I informed her in my last letter that I would have to be leaving 
the job at the end of the month, she invited me to lunch. "F 11 fix you a perfectly normal hamburger 
steak," she wrote. In spite of the Society's rules, I decided to take her up on it. The curiosity of a 
young man of twenty-two was not to be denied. 

Her apartment faced the tracks of the Odakyu Line. The rooms had an orderliness befitting a 
childless couple. Neither the furniture nor the lighting fixtures nor the woman's sweater was of an 
especially costly sort, but they were nice enough. We began with mutual surprise — mine at her 
youthfiil appearance, hers at my actual age. She had imagined me as older than herself. The Society 
did not reveal the age s of its Pen Master s. 

Once we had finished surprising each other, the usual tension of a first meeting was gone. We ate 
our hamburger steak and drank coffee, feeling much like two would-be passengers who had missed 
the same train. And speaking of trains, from the window of her third-floor apartment one could see the 
electric train line below. The weather was lovely that day, and over the railings of the building's 
verandas hung a colorful assortment of sheets and futons drying in the sun. Every now and then came 
the siap of a bamboo whisk fluffing out a futon. I can bring the sound back even now. It was strangely 
devoid of any sense of distance. 

The hamburger steak was perfect — the flavor exactly right, the outer surface grilled to a crisp dark 
brown, the inside tuli of juice, the sauce ideal. Although I could not honestly claim that I had never 
eaten such a delicious hamburger in my life, it was certainly the best I had had in a very long time. I 
told her so, and she was pleased. 

After the coffee, we told each other our life stories while a Burt Bacharach record played. Since I 
didn't really have a life story as yet, she did most of the talking. In college she had wanted to be a 
writer, she said. She talked about Francoise Sagan, one of her favorites. She especially liked Aimez- 
vous Brahms? I myself did not dislike Sagan. At least, I didn't fmd her as cheap as everyone said. 
There's no law requiring everybody to write novels like Henry Miller or Jean Genet. 

"I can't write, though," she said. 

"It's never too late to start," I said. 

"No, I know I can't write. You were the one who informed me of that." She smiled. "Writing letters 
to you, I fmally realized it. I just don't have the talent." 

I turned bright red. It's something I almost never do now, but when I was twenty-two I blushed all 
the time. "Really, though, your writing had something honest about it." 

Instead of answering, she smiled — a tiny smile. 

"At least one letter made me go out for a hamburger steak." 

"You must have been hungry at the time." 

And indeed, maybe I had been. 

A train passed below the window with a dry clatter. 

When ™e clock struck five, I said I would be leaving. "F m sure you have to make dinner for your 



husband." 

"He comes home very late," she said, her cheek against her hand. "He won't be back before 
midnight." 

"He must be a very busy man." 

"I suppose so," she said, pausing momentarily. "I think I once wrote to you about my problem. 
There are certain things I can't really talk with him about. My feelings don't get through to him A lot 
of the time, I feel we're speaking two different languages." 

I didn't know what to say to her. I couldn't understand how one could go on living with someone to 
whomitwas impossible to convey one' s feelings. 

"But it's all right," she said softly, and she made it sound as if it really were all right. "Thanks for 
writing letters to me all these months. I enjoyed them Truly. And writing back to you was my 
salvation." 

"I enjoyed your letters, too," I said, though in fact I could hardly remember anything she had 
written. 

For a while, without speaking, she looked at the clock on the wali. She seemed almost to be 
examining the flow of time. 

"What are you going to do after graduation?" she asked. 

I hadn't decided, I told her. I had no idea what to do. When I said this, she smiled again. "Maybe 
you ought to do some kind of work that involves writing," she said. "Your critiques were beautifully 
written. I used to look forward to them I really did. No flattery intended. For all I know, you were 
just writing them to fulfill a quota, but they had real feeling. Fve kept them all. I take them out every 
once in a while and reread them." 

"Thankyou," I said. "And thanks for the hamburger." 

Tenyears have gone by, but whenever I pass her neighborhood on the Odakyu Line I think of her and of 
her crisply grilled hamburger steak. I look out at the buildings ranged along the tracks and ask myself 
which window could be hers. I think about the view from that window and try to figure out where it 
could have been. But I can never remember. 

Perhaps she doesn't live there anymore. But if she does, she is probably still listening to that same 
Burt Bacharach record on the other side of her window. 

Should I have slept with her? 

That' s the central question of this piece. 

The answer is beyond me. Even now, I have no idea. There are lots of things we never understand, 
no matter how many years we put on, no matter how much experience we accumulate. All I can do is 
look up from the train at the windows in the buildings that might be hers. Every one of them could be 
her window, it sometimes seems to me, and at other times I think that none of them could be hers. 
There are simply too many of them 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



T V 

PeopL E 



Itwassunday evening when the TV People showed up. 

The season, spring. At least, I think it was spring. In any case, it wasn't particularly hot as seasons 
go, not particularly chilly. 

To be honest, the season' s not so important. What matters is that it's a Sunday evening. 

I don't like Sunday evenings. Or, rather, I don't like everything that goes with them — that Sunday- 
evening state of affairs. Without fail, come Sunday evening my head starts to ache. In varying intensity 
each time. Maybe a third to a half of an inch into my temples, the soft flesh throbs — as if invisible 
threads lead out and someone far off is yanking at the other ends. Not that it hurts so much. It ought to 
hurt, but strangely, it doesn't — it's like long needles probing anesthetized areas. 

And I hear things. Not sounds, but thick slabs of silence being dragged through the dark. 
KRZSHAAAL KKRZSHAAAAAL KKKKRMMMS. Those are the initial indications. First, the aching. 
Then, a slight distortion of my vision. Tides of confusion wash through, premonitions tugging at 
memories, memories tugging at premonitions. A finely honed razor moon floats white in the sky, roots 
of doubt burrow into the earth. People walk extra loud down the hall just to get me. KRRSPUMK 
DUWB KRRSPUMKDUWB KRRSPUMK DUWB . 

Ali the more reason for the TV People to single out Sunday evening as the time to come around. 
Like melancholy moods, or the secretive, quiet fail of rain, they steal into the gloom of that appointed 
time. 

Let me explain how the TV People look. 

The TV People are slightly smaller than you or me. Not obviously smaller — slightly smaller. 
About, say, 20 or 30%. Every part of their bodies is uniformly smaller. So rather than "small," the 
more terminologically correct expression might be "reduced." 

In fact, if you see TV People somewhere, you might not notice at first that they' re small. But even if 
you don't, they'll probably strike you as somehow strange. Unsettling, maybe. You' re sure to think 
something's odd, and then you' 11 take another look. There's nothing unnatural about them at first 
glance, but that's what's so unnatural. Their smallness is completely different from that of children 
and dwarfs. When we see children, we feel they' re small, but this sense of recognition comes mostly 
from the misproportioned awkwardness of their bodies. They are small, granted, but not uniformly so. 
The hands are small, but the head is big. Typically, that is. No, the smallness of TV People is 
something else entirely. TV People look as if they were reduced by photocopy, everything 
mechanically calibrated. Say their height has been reduced by a factor of 0.7, then their shoulder 
width is also in 0.7 reduction; ditto (0.7 reduction) for the feet, head, ears, and fmgers. Like plastic 
models, only a little smaller than the real thing. 

Or like perspective demos. Figures that look far away even close up. Something out of a trompe- 
l'oeil painting where the surface warps and buckles. An illusion where the hand fails to touch objects 
close by, yet brushes what is out of reach. 

That's TV People. 

That'sTVPeople. 
That'sTVPeople. 

1 HEREWERETHREE of them altogether. 

They don't knock or ring the doorbell. Don't say hello. They just sneak right in. I don't even hear a 



footstep. One opens the door, the other two carry in a TV Not a very big TV Your ordinary Sony 
color TV The door was locked, I think, but I can't be certain. Maybe I forgot to lock it. It really 
wasn't foremost in my thoughts at the time, so who knows? Still, I think the door was locked. 

When they come in, F m lying on the sofa, gazing up at the ceiling. Nobody at home but me. That 
afternoon, the wife has gone out with the girls — some close friends from her high-school days — 
getting together to talk, then eating dinner out. "Can you grab your own supper?" the wife said before 
leaving. "There's vegetables in the fridge and all sorts of frozen foods. That much you can handle for 
yourself, can't you? And before the sun goes down, remember to take in the laundry, okay?" 

"Sure thing," I said. Doesn't faze me a bit. Rice, right? Laundry, right? Nothing to it. Take care of 
i t, simple as SLUPPP KRRRTZ! 

"Did you say something, dear?" she asked. 

"No, nothing," I said. 

All afternoon I take it easy and loll around on the sofa. I have nothing better to do. I read a bit — that 
new novel by Garcia Marquez — and listen to some music. I have myself a beer. Still, F m unable to 
give my mind to any of this. I consider going back to bed, but I can't even puli myself together enough 
to do that. So I wind up lying on the sofa, staring at the ceiling. 

The way my Sunday afternoons go, I end up doing a little bit of various things, none very well. It's 
a struggle to concentrate on any one thing. This particular day, everything seems to be going right. I 
think, Today F 11 read this book, listen to these records, answer these letters. Today, for sure, I' 11 
clean out my desk drawers, run errands, wash the car for once. But two o'clock rolls around, three 
o'clock rolls around, gradually dusk comes on, and all my plans are blown. I haven't done a thing; 
Fve been lying around on the sofa the whole day, same as always. The clock ticks in my ears. TRPP 
Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. The sound erodes everything around me, little by little, like 
dripping rain. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. Little by little, Sunday afternoon wears down, 
shrinking in scale. Just like the TV People themselves. 

The w people ignore me from the very outset. All three of them have this look that says the likes of me 
don't exist. They open the door and carry in their TV The two put the set on the sideboard, the other 
one plugs it in. There's a mantel clock and a stack of magazines on the sideboard. The clock was a 
wedding gift, big and heavy — big and heavy as time itself- — with a loud sound, too. TRPP Q 
SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. All through the house you can hear it. The TV People move it offthe 
sideboard, down onto the floor. The wife 's going to raise hell, I think. She hates it when things get 
randomly shifted about. If everything isn't in its proper place, she gets really sore. What's worse, 
with the clock there on the floor, I' m bound to trip over it in the middle of the night. I' m forever 
getting up to go to the toilet at two in the morning, bleary-eyed and stumbling over something. 

Next, the TV People move the magazines to the table. All of them women's magazines. (I hardly 
ever read magazines; I read books — personally, I wouldn't mind if every last magazine in the world 
went out of business.) Elle and Marie Claire and Home Ideas, magazines of that ilk. Neatly stacked 
on the sideboard. The wife doesn't like me touching her magazines — change the order of the stack, 
and I never hear the end of it — so I don't go near them Never once flipped through them But the TV 
People couldn't care less: They move them right out of the way, they show no concern, they sweep the 
whole lot off" the sideboard, they mix up the order. Marie Claire is on top of Croissant; Home Ideas 
is underneath Unforgivable. And worse, they' re scattering the bookmarks onto the floor. 



They've lost her place, pages with important information. I have no idea what information or how 
important — might have been for work, might have been personal — but whatever, it was important to 
the wife, and she'll let me know about it. "What's the meaning of this? I go out for a nice time with 
friends, and when I come back, the house is a shambles!" I can just hear it, line for line. Oh, great, I 
think, shaking my head. 

JJ/VERYTHING GETS REMOVED from the sideboard to make room for the television. The TV People plug it into a wali 
socket, then switch it on. Then there is a tinkling noise, and the screen lights up. A moment later, the 
picture floats into view. They change the channels by remote control. But all the channels are blank — 
probably, I think, because they haven't connected the set to an antenna. There has to be an antenna 
outlet somewhere in the apartment. I seem to remember the superintendent telling us where it was 
when we moved into this condominium Ali you had to do was connect it. But I can' t remember where 
it is. We don't own a television, so Fve completely forgotten. 

Yet somehow the TV People don't seem bothered that they aren't picking up any broadcast. They 
give no sign of looking for the antenna outlet. Blank screen, no image — makes no difference to them. 
Having pushed the button and had the power come on, they've completed what they came to do. 

The TV is brand-new. It's not in its box, but one look tells you it's new. The instruction manual and 
guarantee are in a plastic bag taped to the side; the power cable shines, sleek as a freshly caught fish. 

All three TV People look at the blank screen from here and there around the room One of them 
comes over next to me and verifies that you can see the TV screen from where I' m sitting. The TV is 
facing straight toward me, at an optimum viewing distance. They seem satisfied. One operation down, 
says their air of accomplishment. One of the TV People (the one who'd come over next to me) places 
the remote control on the table. 

The TV People speak not a word. Their movements come off in perfect order, hence they don't 
need to speak. Each of the three executes his prescribed function with maximum efficiency A 
Professional job. Neat and clean. Their work is done in no time. As an afterthought, one of the TV 
People picks the clock up from the floor and casts a quick glance around the room to see if there isn't 
a more appropriate place to put it, but he doesn't find any and sets it back down. TRPP Q SCHAOUS 
TRPP Q SCHAOUS. It goes on ticking weightily on the floor. Our apartment is rather small, and a lot 
of floor space tends to be taken up with my books and the wife's reference materials. I am bound to 
trip on that clock. I heave a sigh. No mistake, stub my toes for sure. You can bet on it. 

All three TV People wear dark-blue jackets. Of who-knows-what fabric, but slick. Under them, 
they wear jeans and tennis shoes. Clothes and shoes all proportionately reduced in size. I watch their 
activities for the longest time, until I start to think maybe it's my proportions that are off. Almost as if 
I were riding backward on a roller coaster, wearing strong prescription glasses. The view is 
dizzying, the scale all screwed up. I' m thrown off balance, my customary world is no longer absolute. 
That' s the way the TV People make you feel. 

Up to the very last, the TV People don't say a word. The three of them check the screen one more 
time, confirm that there are no problems, then switch it offby remote control. The glow contracts to a 
point and flickers off with a tinkling noise. The screen returns to its expressionless, gray, natural state. 
The world outside is getting dark. I hear someone calling out to someone else. Anonymous footsteps 
pass by down the hall, intentionally loud as ever. KRRSPUMK DUWB KRRSPUMK DUWB. A 
Sunday evening. 



The TV People give the room another whirlwind inspection, open the door, and leave. Once again, 
they pay no attention to me whatsoever. They act as if I don't exist. 

Fromthetime the TV People come into the apartment to the moment they leave, I don't budge. Don't say a 
word. I remain motionless, stretched out on the sofa, surveying the whole operation. I know what 
you're going to say: That's unnatural. Total strangers — not one but three — walk unannounced right 
into your apartment, plunk down a TV set, and you just sit there staring at them, dumbfounded. Kind of 
odd, don't you think? 

I know, I know. But for whatever reason, I don't speak up, I simply observe the proceedings. 
Because they ignore me so totally. And if you were in my position, I imagine you' d do the same. Not 
to excuse myself, but you have people right in front of you denying your very presence like that, then 
see if you don't doubt whether you actually exist. I look at my hands half expecting to see clear 
through them I' m devastated, powerless, in a trance. My body, my mind are vanishing fast. I can't 
bring myself to move. It's all I can do to watch the three TV People deposit their television in my 
apartment and leave. I can't open my mouth for fear of what my voice might sound like. 

The TV People exit and leave me alone. My sense of reality comes back to me. These hands are 
once again my hands. It's only then I notice that the dusk has been swallowed by darkness. I turn on 
the light. Then I close my eyes. Yes, that's a TV set sitting there. Meanwhile, the clock keeps ticking 
away the minutes. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. 

CuRIOUSLY, THE WIEE makes no mention of the appearance of the television set in the apartment. No reaction at 
all. Zero. It's as if she doesn't even see it. Creepy. Because, as I said before, she's extremely fussy 
about the order and arrangement of furniture and other things. If someone dares to move anything in 
the apartment, even by a hair, she '11 jump on it in an instant. That's her ascendancy. She knits her 
brows, then gets things back the way they were. 

Not me. If an issue of Home Ideas gets put under anAn-An, or a ballpoint pen fmds its way into the 
pencil stand, you don't see me go to pieces. I don't even notice. This is her problem; I'd wear myself 
out living like her. Sometimes she flies into a rage. She tells me she can't abide my carelessness. Yes, 
I say, and sometimes I can't stand carelessness about universal gravitation and n and E = mc 2 , either. 
I mean it. But when I say things like this, she clams up, taking them as a personal insult. I never mean 
it that way; I just say what I feel. 

That night, when she comes home, first thing she does is look around the apartment. I've readied a 
full explanation — how the TV People came and mixed everything up. ItTl be difficult to convince her, 
but I intend to tell her the whole truth. 

She doesn't say a thing, just gives the place the once-over. There's a TV on the sideboard, the 
magazines are out of order on the table, the mantel clock is on the floor, and the wife doesn't even 
comment. There's nothing for me to explain. 

"You get your own supper okay?" she asks me, undressing. 

"No, Ididn'teat,"Itellher. 

"Whynot?" 

"I wasn't really hungry," I say. 

The wife pauses, half-undressed, and thinks this over. She gives me a long look. Should she press 



the subject or not? The clockbreaks up the protracted, ponderous silence. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP 
Q SCHAOUS. I pretend not to hear; I won't let it in my ears. But the sound is simply too heavy, too 
loud to shut out. She, too, seems to be listening to it. Then she shakes her head and says, "Shall I whip 
up something quick?" 

"Well, maybe," I say. I don't really feel much like eating, but I won't turn down the offer. 

The wife changes into around-the-house wear and goes to the kitchen to fix zosui and tamago-yaki 
while filling me in on her friends. Who'd done what, who'd said what, who'd changed her hairstyle 
and looked so much younger, who'd broken up with her boyfriend. I know most of her friends, so I 
pour myself a beer and follow along, inserting attentive uh-huhs at proper intervals. Though, in fact, I 
hardly hear a thing she says. F m thinking about the TV People. That, and why she didn't remark on the 
sudden appearance of the television. No way she couldn't have noticed. Very odd. Weird, even. 
Something i s wrong here. But what to do about it? 

The food is ready, so I sit at the dining-room table and eat. Rice, egg, salt plum. When Fve 
fmished, the wife clears away the dishes. I have another beer, and she has a beer, too. I glance at the 
sideboard, and there's the TV set, with the power off, the remote-control unit sitting on the table. I get 
up from the table, reach for the remote control, and switch it on. The screen glows and I hear it 
tinkling. Still no picture. Only the same blank tube. I press the button to raise the volume, but all that 
does is increase the white-noise roar. I watch the snowstorm for twenty, thirty seconds, then switch it 
off. Light and sound vanish in an instant. Meanwhile, the wife has seated herself on the carpet and is 
flipping through Elle, oblivious of the fact that the TV has just been turned on and off. 

I replace the remote control on the table and sit down on the sofa again, thinking I' 11 go on reading 
that long Garcia Marquez novel. I always read after dinner. I might set the book down after thirty 
minutes, or I might read for two hours, but the thing is to read every day. Today, though, I can't get 
myself to read more than a page and a half. I can't concentrate; my thoughts keep returning to the TV 
set. I look up and see it, right in front of me. 

I wake at half past two in the morning to find the TV still there. I get out of bed half hoping the thing has 
disappeared. No such luck. I go to the toilet, then plop down on the sofa and put my feet up on the 
table. I take the remote control in hand and try turning on the TV No new developments in that 
department, either; only a rerun of the same glow and noise. Nothing else. I look at it awhile, then 
switch it off. 

I go back to bed and try to sleep. Fm dead tired, but sleep isn't coming. I shut my eyes and I see 
them. The TV People carrying the TV set, the TV People moving the clock out of the way, the TV 
People transferring magazines to the table, the TV People plugging the power cable into the wali 
socket, the TV People checking the screen, the TV People opening the door and silently exiting. 
They've stayed on in my head. They're in there walking around. I get back out of bed, go to the 
kitchen, and pour a double brandy into a coffee cup. I down the brandy and head over to the sofa for 
another session with Marquez. I open the pages, yet somehow the words won't sink in. The writing is 
opaque. 

Very well, then, I throw Garcia Marquez aside and pick up Elle. Reading Elle from time to time 
can't hurt anyone. But there isn't anything 'm Elle that catches my fancy. New hairstyles and elegant 
white silk blouses and eateries that serve good beef stew and what to wear to the opera, articles like 
that. Do I care? I throw Elle aside. Which leaves me the television on the sideboard to look at. 



I end up staying awake until dawn, not doing a thing. At six o'clock, I make myself some coffee. I 
don't have anything else to do, so I go ahead and fix ham sandwiches before the wife gets up. 

"You're up awfiil early," she says drowsily. 

"Mmm," I mumble. 

After a nearly wordless breakfast, we leave home together and go our separate ways to our 
respective offices. The wife works at a small publishing house. Edits a natural-food and lifestyle 
magazine. "Shiitake Mushrooms Prevent Gout," "The Future of Organic Farming," you know the kind 
of magazine. Never selis very well, but hardly costs anything to produce; kept afloat by a handflil of 
zealots. Me, I work in the advertising department of an electrical-appliance manufacturer. I dreamup 
ads for toasters and washing machines and microwave ovens. 



L my office building, I pass one of the TV People on the stairs. If Fm not mistaken, it's one of the three who 
brought the TV the day before — probably the one who first opened the door, who didn't actually carry 
the set. Their singular lack of distinguishing features makes it next to impossible to tell them apart, so 
I can't swear to it, but I'd say I' m eight to nine out of ten on the mark. He's wearing the same blue 
jacket he had on the previous day, and he's not carrying anything in his hands. He's merely walking 
down the stairs. Fm walking up. I dislike elevators, so I generally take the stairs. My office is on the 
ninth floor, so this is no mean feat. When Fm in a rush, I get all sweaty by the time I reach the top. 
Even so, getting sweaty has got to be better than taking the elevator, as far as I' m concerned. 
Everyone jokes about it: doesn't own a TV or a VCR, doesn't take elevators, must be a modern-day 
Luddite. Maybe a childhood trauma leading to arrested development. Let them think what they like. 
They're the ones who are screwed up, if you ask me. 

In any case, there I am, climbing the stairs as always; Fm the only one on the stairs — almost 
nobody else uses them — when between the fourth and fifth floors I pass one of the TV People coming 
down. It happens so suddenly I don't know what to do. Maybe I should say something? 

But I don't say anything. I don't know what to say, and he's unapproachable. He leaves no opening; 
he descends the stairs so functionally, at one set tempo, with such regulated precision. Plus, he utterly 
ignores my presence, same as the day before. I don't even enter his field of vision. He slips by before 
I can think what to do. In that instant, the field of gravity warps. 

At work, the day is solid with meetings from the morning on. Important meetings on sales 
campaigns for a new product line. Several employees read reports. Blackboards fiil with figures, bar 
graphs proliferate on computer screens. Heated discussions. I participate, although my contribution to 
the meetings is not that critical because I' m not directly involved with the project. So between 
meetings I keep puzzling things over. I voice an opinion only once. Isn't much of an opinion, either — 
something perfectly obvious to any observer — but I couldn't very well go without saying anything, 
after all. I may not be terribly ambitious when it comes to work, but so long as Fm receiving a salary 
I have to demonstrate responsibility. I summarize the various opinions up to that point and even make 
a j oke to lighten the atmosphere. Half covering for my daydreaming about the TV People. Several 
people laugh. After that one utterance, however, I only pretend to review the materials; Fm thinking 
about the TV People. If they talk up a name for the new microwave oven, I certainly am not aware of 
it. My mind is all TV People. What the hell was the meaning of that TV set? And why haul the TV all 
the way to my apartment in the first place? Why hasn't the wife remarked on its appearance? Why 



have the TV People made inroads into my company? 

The meetings are endless. At noon, there's a short break for lunch. Too short to go out and eat. 
Instead, everyone gets sandwiches and coffee. The conference room is a haze of cigarette smoke, so I 
eat at my own desk. While I' m eating, the section chief comes around. To be perfectly frank, I don't 
like the guy. For no reason I can put my finger on: There's nothing you can fault him on, no single 
target for attack. He has an air of breeding. Moreover, he's not stupid. He has good taste in neckties, 
he doesn't wave his own flag or lord it over his inferiors. He even looks out for me, invites me out 
for the occasional meal. But there's just something about the guy that doesn't sit well with me. Maybe 
it's his habit of coming into body contact with people he's talking to. Men or women, at some point in 
the course of the conversation he'll reach out a hand and touch. Not in any suggestive way, mind you. 
No, his manner is brisk, his bearing perfectly casual. I wouldn't be surprised if some people don't 
even notice, it's so natural. Still — I don't know why — it does bother me. So whenever I see him, 
almost instinctively I brace myself. Call it petty, it gets to me. 

He leans over, placing a hand on my shoulder. "About your statement at the meeting just now. Very 
nice," says the section chief warmly. "Very simply put, very pivotal. I was impressed. Points well 
taken. The whole room buzzed at that statement of yours. The timing was perfect, too. Yessir, you 
keep 'em coming like that." 

And he glides off. Probably to lunch. I thank him straight out, but the honest truth is I' m taken aback. 
I mean, I don't remember a thing of what I said at the meeting. Why does the section chief have to 
come all the way over to my desk to praise me for that? There have to be more brilliant examples of 
Homo loquens around here. Strange. I go on eating my lunch, uncomprehending. Then I think about the 
wife. Wonder what she's up to right now. Out to lunch? Maybe I ought to give her a call, exchange a 
few words, anything. I dial the first three digits, have second thoughts, hang up. I have no reason to be 
calling her. My world may be crumbling, out of balance, but is that a reason to ring up her office? 
What can I say about all this, anyway? Besides, I hate calling her at work. I set down the receiver, let 
out a sigh, and fmish off my coffee. Then I toss the Styrofoam cup into the wastebasket. 

At ONE OF THE AFTERNOON MEETINGS, I see TV People again. This time, their number has increased by two. Just as on 
the previous day, they come traipsing across the conference room, carrying a Sony color TV A model 
one size bigger. Uh-oh. Sony's the rival camp. If, for whatever reason, any competitor's product gets 
brought into our offices, there's hell to pay, barring when other manufacturers' products are brought in 
for test comparisons, of course. But then we take pains to remove the company logo — just to make 
sure no outside eyes happen upon it. Little do the TV People care: The Sony mark is emblazoned for 
all to see. They open the door and march right into the conference room, flashing it in our direction. 
Then they parade the thing around the room, scanning the place for somewhere to set it down, until at 
last, not finding any location, they carry it backward out the door. The others in the room show no 
reaction to the TV People. And they can't have missed them. No, they've definitely seen them. And 
the proof is they even got out of the way, clearing a path for the TV People to carry their television 
through. Still, that's as far as it went: a reaction no more alarmed than when the nearby coffee shop 
delivered. They' d made it a ground rule not to acknowledge the presence of the TV People. The 
others all knew they were there; they just acted as if they weren't. 

None of it makes any sense. Does everybody know about the TV People? Am I alone in the dark? 
Maybe the wife knew about the TV People all along, too. Probably. I' 11 bet that's why she wasn't 
surprised by the television and why she didn't mention it. That's the only possible explanation. Yet 



this confuses me even more. Who or what, then, are the TV People? And why are they always 
carrying around TV sets? 

One colleague leaves his seat to go to the toilet, and I get up to follow. This is a guy who entered 
the company around the same time I did. We're on good terms. Sometimes we go out for a drink 
together after work. I don't do that with most people. I'm standing next to him at the urinals. He's the 
first to complain. "Oh, joy! Looks like we're in for more of the same, straight through to evening. I 
swear! Meetings, meetings, meetings, going to drag on forever." 

"You can say that again," I say. We wash our hands. He compliments me on the morning meeting's 
statement. I thank him 

"Oh, by the way, those guys who came in with the TV just now ..." I launch forth, then cut off. 

He doesn't say anything. He turns off the faucet, pulls two paper towels from the dispenser, and 
wipes his hands. He doesn't even shoot a glance in my direction. How long can he keep drying his 
hands? Eventually, he crumples up his towels and throws them away. Maybe he didn't hear me. Or 
maybe he's pretending not to hear. I can' t tell. But from the sudden strain in the atmosphere, I know 
enough not to ask. I shut up, wipe my hands, and walk down the corridor to the conference room. The 
rest of the afternoon's meetings, he avoids my eyes. 

W HEN I GET HOME from work, the apartment is dark. Outside, dark clouds have swept in. It's beginning to 
rain. The apartment smells like rain. Night is coming on. No sign of the wife. I loosen my tie, smooth 
out the wrinkles, and hang it up. I brush off my suit. I toss my shirt into the washing machine. My hair 
smells like cigarette smoke, so I take a shower and shave. Story of my life: I go to endless meetings, 
get smoked to death, then the wife gets on my case about it. The very first thing she did after we were 
married was make me stop smoking. Four years ago, that was. 

Out of the shower, I sit on the sofa with a beer, drying my hair with a towel. The TV People 's 
television is still sitting on the sideboard. I pick up the remote control from the table and push the 
"on" switch. Again and again I press, but nothing happens. The screen stays dark. I check the plug; it's 
in the socket, all right. I unplug it, then plug it back in. Still no go. No matter how often I press the 
"on" switch, the screen does not glow. Just to be sure, I pry open the back cover of the remote-control 
unit, remove the batteries, and check them with my handy electrical-contact tester. The batteries are 
fme. At this point, I give up, throw the remote control aside, and slosh down more beer. 

Why should it upset me? Supposing the TV did come on, what then? It would glow and crackle 
with white noise. Who cares, if that' s all that'd come on? 

I care. Last night it worked. And I haven't laid a fmger on it since. Doesn't make sense. 

I try the remote control one more time. I press slowly with my finger. But the result is the same. No 
response whatsoever. The screen is dead. Cold. 

Dead cold. 

I puli another beer out of the fridge and eat some potato salad from a plastic tub. It's past six 
o'clock. I read the whole evening paper. If anything, it's more boring than usual. Almost no article 
worth reading, nothing but inconsequential news items. But I keep reading, for lack of anything better 
to do. Until I fmish the paper. What next? To avoid pursuing that thought any flirther, I dally over the 
newspaper. Hmm, how about answering letters? A cousin of mine has sent us a wedding invitation, 
which I have to turn down. The day of the wedding, the wife and I are going to be off on a trip. To 



Okinawa. We' ve been planning it for ages; we're both taking time off from work. We can't very well 
go changing our plans now. God only knows when we'll get the next chance to spend a long holiday 
together. And to clinch it all, I'm not even that close to my cousin; haven't seen her in almost ten 
years. Still, I can't leave replying to the last minute. She has to know how many people are coming, 
how many settings to plan for the banquet. Oh, forget it. I can't bring myself to write, not now. My 
heart isn't in it. 

I pick up the newspaper again and read the same articles over again. Maybe I ought to start 
preparing dinner. But the wife might be working late and could come home having eaten. Which 
would mean wasting one portion. And if I am going to eat alone, I can make do with leftovers; no 
reason to make something up special. If she hasn't eaten, we can go out and eat together. 

Odd, though. Whenever either of us knows he or she is going to be later than six, we always call in. 
That's the rule. Leave a message on the answering machine if necessary. That way, the other can 
coordinate: go ahead and eat alone, or set something out for the late arriver, or hit the sack. The nature 
of my work sometimes keeps me out late, and she often has meetings, or proofs to dispatch, before 
coming home. Neither of us has a regular nine-to-five job. When both of us are busy, we can go three 
days without a word to each other. Those are the breaks — just one of those things that nobody 
planned. Hence we always keep certain rules, so as not to place unrealistic burdens on each other. If 
it looks as though we're going to be late, we call in and let the other one know. I sometimes forget, 
but she, never once. 

Still, there's no message on the answering machine. 

I toss the newspaper, stretch out on the sofa, and shut my eyes. 

I dreamabout a meeting. I'm standing up, delivering a statement I myself don't understand. I open my 
mouth and talk. If I don't, I'm a dead man. I have to keep talking. Have to keep coming out with 
endless blah-blah-blah. Everyone around me is dead. Dead and turned to stone. A roomful of stone 
statues. A wind is blowing. The windows are all broken; gusts of air are coming in. And the TV 
People are here. Three of them Like the first time. They're carrying a Sony color TV And on the 
screen are the TV People. I'm running out of words; little by little I can feel my fingertips growing 
stifTen Gradually turning to stone. 

I open my eyes to fmd the room aglow. The color of corridors at the Aquarium. The television is 
on. Outside, everything is dark. The TV screen is flickering in the gloom, static crackling. I sit up on 
the sofa, and press my temples with my fingertips. The flesh of my fmgers is still soft; my mouth tastes 
like beer. I swallow. I'm dried out; the saliva catches in my throat. As always, the waking world 
pales after an all-too-real dream. But no, this is real. Nobody's turned to stone. What time is it getting 
to be? I look for the clock on the floor. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. A little before eight. 

Yet, just as in the dream, one of the TV People is on the television screen. The same guy I passed 
on the stairs to the office. No mistake. The one who first opened the door to the apartment. I'm 100% 
sure. He stands there — against a bright, fluorescent white background, the tail end of a dream 
infiltrating my conscious reality — staring at me. I shut, then reopen my eyes, hoping he'll have slipped 
back to never-never land. But he doesn't disappear. Far from it. He gets bigger. His face fills the 
whole screen, getting closer and closer. 

The next thing I know, he's stepping through the screen. Hands gripping the frame, lifting himself up 
and over, one foot after the other, like climbing out of a window, leaving a white TV screen glowing 



behind him. 

He rubs his left hand in the palm of his right, slowly acclimating himself to the world outside the 
television. On and on, reduced right-hand fingers rubbing reduced left-hand fingers, no hurry. He has 
that all-the-time-in-the-world nonchalance. Like a veteran TV-show host. Then he looks me in the 
face. 

"We're making an airplane," says my TV People visitant. His voice has no perspective to it. A 
curious, paper-thin voice. 

He speaks, and the screen is all machinery. Very professional fade-in. Just like on the news. First, 
there's an opening shot of a large factory interior, then it cuts to a close-up of the work space, camera 
center. Two TV People are hard at work on some machine, tightening bolts with wrenches, adjusting 
gauges. The picture of concentration. The machine, however, is unlike anything Fve ever seen: an 
upright cylinder except that it narrows toward the top, with streamlined protrusions along its surface. 
Looks more like some kind of gigantic orange juicer than an airplane. No wings, no seats. 

"Doesn't look like an airplane," I say. Doesn't sound like my voice, either. Strangely brittle, as if 
the nutrients had been strained out through a thick filter. Have I grown so old all of a sudden? 

"That's probably because we haven't painted it yet," he says. "Tomorrow we'll have it the right 
color. ThenyouTl see it's an airplane." 

"The color' s not the problem It's the shape. That's not an airplane." 

"Well, if it's not an airplane, what is it?" he asks me. If he doesn't know, and I don't know, then 
what is it? "So, that's why it's got to be the color." The TV People rep puts it to me gently. "Paint it 
the right color, and it'll be an airplane." 

I don't feel like arguing. What difference does it make? Orange juicer or airplane — flying orange 
juicer? — what do I care? Still, where's the wife while all this is happening? Why doesn't she come 
home? I massage my temples again. The clock ticks on. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. The 
remote control lies on the table, and next to it the stack of women's magazines. The telephone is 
silent, the room illuminated by the dim glow of the television. 

The two TV People on the screen keep working away. The image is much clearer than before. You 
can read the numbers on the dials, hear the faint rumble of machinery. TAABZHRAYBGG 
TAABZHRAYBGG ARP ARRP TAABZHRAYBGG. This bass line is punctuated periodically by a sharp, 
metallic grating. AREEEENBT AREEEENBT. And various other noises are interspersed through the 
remaining aural space; I can' t hear anything clearly over them. Still, the two TV People labor on for 
all they're worth. That, apparently, is the subject of this program. I go on watching the two of them as 
they work on and on. Their colleague outside the TV set also looks on in silence. At them. At that 
thing — for the life of me, it does not look like an airplane — that insane machine all black and grimy, 
floating in a field of white light. 

The TV People rep speaks up. "Shame about your wife." 

I look him in the face. Maybe I didn't hear him right. Staring at him is like peering into the glowing 
tube itself. 

"Shame about your wife," the TV People rep repeats in exactly the same absent tone. 
"How'sthat?"Iask. 

"How's that? It's gone too far," says the TV People rep in a voice like a plastic-card hotel key. 



Flat, uninflected, it slices into me as if it were sliding through a thin slit. "It's gone too far: She's out 
there." 

"It's gone too far: She's out there, " I repeat in my head. Very plain, and without reality. I can't 
grasp the context. Cause has effect by the tail and is about to swallow it whole. I get up and go to the 
kitchen. I open the refrigerator, take a deep breath, reach for a can of beer, and go back to the sofa. 
The TV People rep stands in place in front of the television, right elbow resting on the set, and 
watches me extract the pull-tab. I don't really want to drink beer at this moment; I just need to do 
something. I drink one sip, but the beer doesn't taste good. I hold the can in my hand dumbly until it 
becomes so heavy I have to set it down on the table. 

Then I think about the TV People rep's revelation, about the wife's failure to materialize. He's 
saying she's gone. That she isn't coming home. I can't bring myself to believe it's over. Sure, we're 
not the perfect couple. In four years, we've had our spats; we have our little problems. But we always 
talk them out. There are things we've resolved and things we haven't. Most of what we couldn't 
resolve we let ride. Okay, so we have our ups and downs as a couple. I admit it. But is this cause for 
despair? C'mon, show me a couple who don't have problems. Besides, it's only a little past eight. 
There must be some reason she can't get to a phone. Any number of possible reasons. For instance. . . I 
can't think of a single one. F m hopelessly confused. 

I fail back deep into the sofa. 

How on earth is that airplane — if it is an airplane — supposed to fly? What propels it? Where are 
the windows? Which is the front, which is the back? 

Fm dead tired. Exhausted. I still have to write that letter, though, to beg off from my cousin's 
invitation. My work schedule does not afford me the pleasure of attending. Regrettable. 
Congratulations, all the same. 

The two TV People in the television continue building their airplane, oblivious of me. They toil 
away; they don't stop for anything. They have an infmite amount of work to get through before the 
machine is complete. No sooner have they finished one operation than they' re busy with another. They 
have no assembly instructions, no plans, but they know precisely what to do and what comes next. The 
camera ably follows their deft motions. Clear-cut, easy-to-follow camera work. Highly credible, 
convincing images. No doubt other TV People (Nos. 4 and 5?) are manning the camera and control 
panel. 

Strange as it may sound, the more I watch the flawless form of the TV People as they go about their 
work, the more the thing starts to look like an airplane. At least, it'd no longer surprise me if it 
actually flew. What does it matter which is front or back? With all the exacting detail work they' re 
putting in, it has to be an airplane. Even if it doesn't appear so — to them, it's an airplane. Just as the 
little guy said, "If it's not an airplane, then what is it?" 

The TV People rep hasn't so much as twitched in all this time. Right elbow still propped up on the 
TV set, he's watching me. Fm being watched. The TV People factory crew keeps working. Busy, 
busy, busy. The clock ticks on. TRPP Q SCHAOUS TRPP Q SCHAOUS. The room has grown dark, 
stifling. Someone's footsteps echo down the hall. 

Well, it suddenly occurs to me, maybe so. Maybe the wife is out there. She's gone somewhere far 
away. By whatever means of transport, she's gone somewhere far out of my reach. Maybe our 
relationship has suffered irreversible damage. Maybe it's a total loss. Only I haven't noticed. All 
sorts of thoughts unravel inside me, then the frayed ends come together again. "Maybe so," I say out 



loud. My voice echoes, hollow. 

"Tomorrow, when we paint it, you'll see better," he resumes. "Ali it needs is a touch of color to 
make it an airplane." 

I look at the palms of my hands. They have shrunk slightly. Ever so slightly. Power of suggestion? 
Maybe the light's playing tricks on me. Maybe my sense of perspective has been thrown off. Yet, my 
palms really do look shriveled. Hey now, wait just a minute! Let me speak. There's something I 
should say. I must say. I' 11 dry up and turn to stone if I don't. Like the others. 

"The phone will ring soon," the TV People rep says. Then, after a measured pause, he adds, "In 
another five minutes." 

I look at the telephone; I think about the telephone cord. Endless lengths of phone cable linking one 
telephone to another. Maybe somewhere, at some terminal of that awesome megacir-cuit, is my wife. 
Far, far away, out of my reach. I can feel her pulse. Another five minutes, I tell myself. Which way is 
front, which way is back? I stand up and try to say something, but no sooner have I got to my feet than 
the words slip away. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



A 

S L O W 

B O AT 

T O 

cH I N A 



When did I meet my first Chinese? 

Just like that, my archaeologist begins sifting through the tell of my own past. Labeling all the 
artifacts, categorizing, analyzing. 

And so, when was that first encounter? As near as I can figure, it was 1959 or 1960. Whichever, 
whatever, what's the difference? Precisely nothing. The years '59 and '60 stand there like gawky 
twins in matching nerd suits. Even if I hopped a time machine back to the period, I doubt I could tell 
the two apart. 

In spite of which, I persist with my labors. Doggedly expanding the dig, filling out the picture with 
every least new fmd. Shards of memory. 

Okay, I' m sure it was the year Johansson and Patterson fought for the world heavyweight title. 
Which means, all I have to do is go search through the sports section in old copies of The Year in 
News. That would settle everything. 

In the morning, F m off on my bike to the local library Next to the main entrance, for who knows 
what reason, there's a tiny henhouse, in which five chickens are enjoying what is either a late 
breakfast or an early lunch. It's a bright, clear day, so before going inside I sit down on the pavement 
next to the chickens and light up a cigarette. I watch the chickens pecking at their feedbox busily. 
Frenetically, in fact, so that they look like one of those old newsreels with too few frames per second. 

After my cigarette, something's changed in me. Again, who knows why? But for what it's worth, 
the new me — five chickens and a smoke away from what I was — now poses myself two questions: 

First, Who could possibly have any interest in the exact date when I met my first Chinese? 

And second, What exactly is there to be gained by spreading out those Year In Newses on a 
sunny reference-room desk? 

Good questions. I smoke another cigarette, then get back onto my bike and bid farewell to fowl and 
file copies. If birds in flight go unburdened by names, let my memories be free of dates. 

Granted, most of my memories don't bear dates anyway. My recall is a damn sight short of total. 
It's so unreliable that I sometimes think I' m trying to prove something by it. But what would I be 
proving? Especially since inexactness is not exactly the sort of thing you can prove with any accuracy. 

Anyway — or rather, that being the case — my memory can be impressively ifiy. I get things the 
wrong way around, fabrication filters into fact, sometimes my own eyewitness account interchanges 
with somebody else's. At which point, can you even call it memory anymore? Witness the sum of 
what I'm capable of dredging up from primary school (those pathetic six years of sunsets in the 
heyday of postwar democracy). Two events: this Chinese story, for one, and for another, a baseball 
game one afternoon during summer vacation. In that game, I was playing center field, and I blacked 
out in the bottom of the third. I mean, I didn't just collapse out of nowhere. The reason I blacked out 
that day was that we were allowed only one small corner of the nearby high school 's athletic field, 
and so when I was running full speed after a pop fly I smashed head-on into the post of the backboard 
of the basketball court next to where we were playing. 

Whenicameto, I was lying on a bench under an arbor, it was late in the day, and the first things I noticed 
were the wet-and-dry smell of water that had been sprinkled over the baked earth and the musk of my 
brand-new leather glove, which they' d put under my head for a pillow. Then there was this duli pain 



in my temple. I guess I must have said something. I don't really remember. Only later did a buddy of 
mine who'd been looking after me get around to telling. That what I apparently said was, That 's okay, 
brush off the dirt and you can still eat it. 

Now, where did that come from? To this day, I have no idea. I guess I was dreaming, probably 
about lunch. But two decades later the phrase is still there, kicking around in my head. 

That 's okay, brush off the dirt and you can still eat it. 

With these words, I find myself thinking about my ongoing existence as a human being and the path 
that lies ahead of me. Though of course these thoughts lead to but one place — death. Imagining death 
is, at least for me, an awfully hazy proposition. And death, for some reason, reminds me of the 
Chinese. 



1 HERE WAS AN ELEMENTARY school for Chinese up the hill from the harbor (forgive me, Fve completely forgotten 
the name of the school, so F 11 just call it "the Chinese elementary school"), and I had to go there to 
take a Standard aptitude test. Out of several test locations, the Chinese elementary school was the 
farthest away, and I was the only one in my class assigned there. A clerical mix-up, maybe? 
Everybody else was sent somewhere closer. 

Chinese elementary school? 

I asked everyone I knew if they knew anything about this Chinese elementary school. No one knew 
a thing, except that it was half an hour away by train. Now, back then I didn't do much in the way of 
exploring, hardly ever rode around to places by myself, so for me this might as well have been the 
end of the earth. 

The Chinese elementary school at the edge of the world. 

OUNDAY MORNING two weeks later found me in a dark funk as I sharpened a dozen pencils, then packed my 
lunch and classroom slippers into my plastic schoolbag, as prescribed. It was a sunny day, maybe a 
little too warm for autumn, but my mother made me wear a sweater anyway. I boarded the train all by 
myself and stood by the door the whole way, looking out the window. I didn't want to miss the stop. 

I spotted the Chinese elementary school even without looking at the map printed on the back of the 
registration form. All I had to do was follow a flock of kids with slippers and lunch boxes stuffed into 
their schoolbags. There were tens, maybe hundreds, of kids filing up the steep grade. A pretty 
remarkable sight. No one was kicking a ball, no one was pulling at a younger kid's cap; everyone was 
just walking quietly. Like a demonstration of indeterminate perpetual motion. Climbing the hill, I 
started sweating under my heavy sweater. 

Contrary to whatever vague expectations I may have had, the Chinese elementary school did not look much 
different from my own school. In fact, it was cleaner. The long, dark corridors, the musty air.... All 
the images that had filled my head for two weeks proved totally unfounded. Passing through the fancy 
iron gates, I followed the gentle arc of a stone path between plantings to the main entrance, where a 
clear pond sparkled in the 9:00 AM sun. Along the facade stood a row of trees, each with a plaque 



identifying the tree in Chinese. Some characters I could read, some I couldn't. The entrance opened 
onto an enclosed courtyard, in the corners of which were a bronze bust of somebody, a small white 
rain gage, and an exercise bar. 

I removed my shoes at the entrance as instructed, then went to the classroom assigned to me. It was 
bright, with forty fold-top desks neatly arranged in rows, each place affixed with a registration tag. 
My seat was in the very front row by the window; I guess I had the lowest number. 

The blackboard was a pristine deep green; the teacher's place was set with a box of chalk and a 
vase bearing a single white chrysanthemum Everything was spotless, a flawless picture of order. 
There were no drawings or compositions tacked up willy-nilly on the bulletin board. Maybe they'd 
been taken down so as not to distract us during the test. I took my seat, set out my pencil case and 
writing pad, propped up my chin, and closed my eyes. 

It was nearly fifteen minutes later when the proctor of the test came in, carrying the stack of exams 
under his arm. He didn't look anything over forty, but he walked with a cane and dragged his left foot 
in a slight limp. The cane was made of cherry wood, sort of crudely, the kind of thing they sell as 
souvenirs at the summit of a hiking trail. The proctor 's limp was unaffected, so you noticed the cheap 
cane more. Forty pairs of eyes focused on this guy, or, rather, on the exams, and all was resounding 
silence. 

The proctor mounted the stand in front of the class, placed the exams on his desk, then plunked his 
cane down on the side. He checked that all the seats were filled, coughed, and glanced at his watch. 
Then, damping both hands on the edges of the desk as if to hold himself down, he lifted his gaze 
straight to a corner of the ceiling. 

Silence. 

Fifteen seconds and not a sound. The kids all tensed and held their breath, staring at the stack of 
exams; the lame-legged proctor stared at the ceiling. He was wearing a light-gray suit with a white 
shirt and a tie of eminently forgettable color and pattern. He took off his glasses, wiped the lenses 
with a handkerchief, very deliberately, and put them back on. 

'T shall be acting as your test proctor," the man fmally spoke. Shall. "As soon as you receive your 
exam booklet, place it facedown on your desk. Do not turn it over. Keep both hands flat on your lap. 
When I say 'Begin,' you may turn it faceup and begin. When there are ten minutes remaining before 
the end of the test period, I shall say to you, 'Ten minutes left.' At that time, check your work to see 
that you have not made any minor errors. When I say 'Stop,' that is the end of the test period. Turn 
your examination booklet facedown and place your hands on your lap. Is that understood?" 

Silence. 

He looked at his watch again. 

"Well, as I see that we have ten minutes before the beginning of the test, I'd like to have a little talk 
with you. Please relax." 

Phew, phew. There were several sighs. 

"I am Chinese and I teach at this school." 

My FIRST CHINESE! 

He didn't look Chinese. But what did I expect? What was a Chinese supposed to look like? 



"In this classroom," he continued, "Chinese students the same age as yourselves all study as hard as 
you do. . .. Now, as you all know, China and Japan are neighboring countries. In order for everyone to 
enjoy happy lives, neighbors must make friends. Isn't that right?" 

Silence. 

"Of course, some things about our two countries are very similar and some things are very 
different. Some things we understand about each other and some things we do not. But isn't that the 
same with you and your friends? Even if they are your friends, some things they cannot understand. 
But if you make an effort, you can still become close. That is what I believe. But in order to do that, 
we must begin with respect for each other. . . . That is the first step." 

Silence. 

"For instance. Suppose many, many Chinese children went to your school to take a test. Just as you 
yourselves are doing now, sitting at Chinese children' s desks. Think about this, please." 

H mm. 

"Suppose that on Monday morning, all of you go back to your school. You go to your desks. And 
what do you see? You see that there are doodles and marks all over your desks, chewing gum stuck 
under the seat, one of your classroom slippers is missing. How would you feel?" 

Silence. 

"For instance, you," he said, turning to point right at me, me with the lowest registration number, 
"would you be happy?" 

Everyone looked at me. 

I blushed bright red and shook my head. 

"So you see," he said, turning back to the class again, as everyone's eyes shifted back to the front 
of the room, "you must not mark up the desks or stick gum under the seats or go fooling around with 
what' s inside the desks. Is that understood?" 

Silence. 

"Chinese children speakup louder when they answer." 

Yes, came forty replies. Or, rather, thirty-nine. My mouth wouldn't open. 

"Well, then, heads up, chests out." 

We looked up and swelled to attention. 

"And be proud." 

• • • 

OOME TWENTY YEARS ON, Fve completely forgotten the results of the test. All I remember is the school kids 
walking quietly up the hill and the Chinese teacher. That, and how to hold my head up with pride. 



3. 



1 HE TOWN WHERE I WENT to high school was a port town, so there were quite a few Chinese around. Not that 
they seemed any different from the rest of us. Nor did they have any special traits. They were as 
different from each other as could be, and in that way they were the same as us. When I think about it, 
the curious thing about individuals is that their singularity always goes beyond any category or 
generalization in the book. 

There were several Chinese kids in my class. Some got good grades, others didn't. There was the 
cheerful type and the dead-quiet character. One who lived in an almost palatial spread, another in a 
sunless one-room-kitchenette walk-up. Really, all sorts. Though I never did get especially close to 
any of them I wasn't your let's-make-friends sort of guy. Japanese or Chinese or anything else, made 
no difference. 

I did, however, meet up with one of them ten years later, though I probably shouldn't get into that 
just yet. 

Meanwhile, the scene shifts to Tokyo. 

My NEXT CHINESE - —that is, not counting those high-school Chinese classmates whom I didn't especially 
speak to — was a shy giri I got to know at a part-time job during the spring of my sophomore year. She 
was nineteen, like me, and petite, and pretty. We worked together for three weeks during the break. 

She was exceedingly diligent about work. I did my part, working as hard as I could, I suppose, but 
whenever I peeked over at her plugging away it was pretty obvious that her idea and my idea of 
applying oneself weren't the same animal. I mean, compared to my "If you're going to do something, 
it's worth doing it well," her inner drive cut closer to the root of humanity. Not that it's much of an 
explanation, but this drive of hers had the disturbing urgency of someone whose whole worldly 
existence was barely held together by that one thread. Most people couldn't possibly keep up with the 
pace she maintained; sooner or later they would throw up their hands in frustration. The only one who 
managed to stick it out to the very end working with her was me. 

Even so, we hardly spoke a word at first. I tried a couple of times to strike up a conversation, but 
she didn't seem particularly interested in speaking, so I backed off. The first time we actually sat 
down and talked was two weeks after we started working together. That morning, for half an hour, 
she 'd been thrown into something of a panic. It was unprecedented for her. The cause of it all was a 
slight oversight, one small operation out of order. Sure, it was her fault, her responsibility, if it came 
to that, but from where I stood it seemed like a common enough mishap. A momentary lapse and 
— glitch! Could have happened to anyone. But not to her. A tiny crack in her head widened into a 
fissure, eventually becoming a gaping chasm She wouldn't, she couldn't, take another step. At a total 
loss for words, she froze in place. She was a sorry sight, a ship sinking slowly in the night sea. 

I cut short what I was doing, sat her down in a chair, pried loose her clenched fmgers one by one, 
made her drink some hot coffee. Then I told her, It's all right, there's nothing to worry about, 
no thing' s too late to remedy, you just redo that part again from the beginning and you won't be so far 
behind in your work. And even if you are a little behind, it won't kill you. Her eyes were glazed, but 
she nodded silently. With some coffee in her, she began to calm down. 

"F m sorry," she whispered. 

That lunch break, we talked about this and that. And that was when she told me she was Chinese. 
Where we worked was a tiny, dark, small-time publisher's warehouse in Bunkyo Ward, downtown Tokyo. 



A dirty little open sewer of a stream ran right beside it. The work was easy, boring, busy. I got order 
slips, which told us how many copies of what books to haul out to the entrance. She would bind these 
up with cord and check them off against the inventory record. That was the whole job. There was no 
heating in the place, so we had to hustle our buns off to keep from freezing to death. Sometimes it was 
so cold I thought we wouldn't be any better off shoveling snow at the airport in Anchorage. 

At lunchtime, we'd head out for something hot to eat, warming ourselves for the hour until our 
break was up. More than anything, the main objective was to thaw out. But from the time she had her 
panic, little by little we found ourselves on speaking terms. Her words came in bits and pieces, but 
after a while I got the picture. Her father ran a small import business in Yokohama, most of the 
merchandise he handled being bargain clothing from Hong Kong. Although Chinese, she herself was 
Japanese-born and had never once been to China or Hong Kong or Taiwan. Plus, she 'd gone to 
Japanese schools, not Chinese. Hardly spoke a word of Chinese, but was strong in English. She was 
attending a private women's university in the city and hoped to become an interpreter. Meanwhile, 
she was sharing her brother's apartment in Komagome, or, to borrow her turn of phrase, she 'd fallen 
in with him. Seemed she didn't get along well with her father. And that's the sum total of what I found 
out about her. 

Those two weeks in March passed along with the sleet of the season. On the evening of our last day 
of work, after picking up my pay from accounting and after some hesitation, I decided to ask my 
Chinese co-worker out to a discotheque in Shinjuku. Not that I had any intention of making a pass at 
her. I already had a steady girlfriend since high school, though if the truth be told we were beginning 
to go our separate ways. 

The Chinese giri thought it over a few seconds, then said, "But Fve never been dancing." 

"There's nothing to it," I said. "It's not ballroom dancing. Ali you have to do is move to the beat. 
Anyone can do it." 

First, we went and had some beer and pizza. No more work. No more freezing warehouse. What a 
liberating feeling! I was more jovial than may have been usual; she laughed more, too. Then we went 
to the disco and danced for two whole hours. The place was nice and warm, swimming with mirror 
balls and incense. A Filipino band was pounding out Santana covers. We'd workup a sweat dancing, 
then go sit out a number over a beer, then, when the sweat subsided, we'd get up and dance again. In 
the colored strobe lights, she looked like a different person from the shy warehouse stock giri I knew. 
And once she got the hang of dancing, she actually seemed to enjoy it. 

When we'd fmally danced ourselves out, we left the club. The March night was brisk, but there 
was a hint of spring in the air. We were overheated from all that exercise, so we just walked, 
aimlessly, hands in our pockets. We stopped into an arcade, got a cup of coffee, kept walking. We 
still had half the school break ahead of us. We were nineteen. If someone had told us to, we would 
have walked clear out to the Tama River. 

At ten-twenty, she said she had to go. 'T have to be home by eleven." She was almost apologetic. 

"That's pretty strict," I said. 

"My brother thinks he's my guardian protector. But I guess I can't complain, since he's giving me a 
roof over my head." From the way she spoke, I could tell she really liked her brother. 

"Just don't forget your slipper," I said with a wink. 



"My slipper?" Five, six steps later, she burst out laughing. "Oh, you mean like Cinderella? Don't 
worry, I won't forget." 

We climbed the steps in Shinjuku Station and sat down on a platform bench. 

"You know," I said, "do you think I could have your phone number? Maybe we can go out and have 
some fun again sometime." 

She bit her lip, nodded, then gave me her number. I scribbled it down on a matchbook from the 
disco. The train came in and I put her on board and said good night. Thanks, it was fun, see you. The 
doors closed, the train pulled out, and I crossed over to the next track to wait for my train bound for 
Ikebukuro. Leaning back on a column, I lit up a cigarette and thought about the evening. From the 
restaurant to the disco to the walk. Not bad. It'd been ages since I'd been out on a date. I'd had a good 
time and I knew she had a good time, too. We could be friends. Maybe she was a little shy, maybe she 
had her nervous side. Still, I liked her. 

I put my cigarette out under my heel and lit another one. The sounds of the city blurred lazily into 
the dark. I shut my eyes and took a deep breath. Nothing was amiss, but I couldn't shake this nagging 
feeling. Something wasn't right. What was it? What had I done? 

Then it hit me, right when I got off the train at Mejiro. I'd put her on the Yamanote Loop Line 
going the wrong way. 

My dormitory was in Mejiro, four stops before hers. So she could have taken the same train as me. 
It would have been all so simple. Why had I taken it upon myself to see that she got on a train going 
the opposite way around? Did I have that much to drink? Was I thinking too much, or only, about 
myself? The station clock read 10:45. She 'd never make her curfew. I hoped she 'd realized my 
mistake and switched to a train going the right way. But I doubted she would have. She wasn't that 
type. No, she was the type to keep riding the train the wrong way around. But shouldn't she have 
known about this mistake from the start? She had to know she was being put on the wrong train. Great, 
I thought. Just great. 



Itwastenaftereleven when she finally got off at Komagome Station. When she saw me standing by the stairs, 
she stopped in her tracks with this expression, like she didn't know whether to laugh or fume. It was 
all I could do to take her by the arm and sit her down on a bench. She put her bag in her lap and 
clutched the strap with both hands. She placed her feet straight out in front of her and stared at the toes 
of her white pumps. 

I apologized to her. I told her I didn't know why I'd made that stupid mistake. My mind must have 
been elsewhere. 

"You honestly made a mistake?" she asked. 

"Of course. If not, why would I have done such a thing?" 

"I thought you did it on purpose." 

"On purpose?" 

"Because I thought you were angry." 
"Angry?" What was she talking about? 
"Yeah." 



"What makes you think I'd be angry?" 

"I don't know," she said in a shrinking voice. 

Two tears spilled from her eyes and fell audibly onto her bag. 

What was I to do? I just sat there, not saying a word. Trains pulled in, discharged passengers, and 
pulled out. People disappeared down the stairs, and it was quiet again. 

"Please. Just leave me alone." She smiled, parting her bangs to the side. "At first, I thought it was a 
mistake, too. So I thought, Why not just go on riding the opposite way? But by the time I passed Tokyo 
Station, I thought otherwise. Everything was wrong. I don't ever want to be in a position like that 
again." 

I wanted to say something, but the words wouldn't come. Wind blew stray pieces of newspaper to 
the far end of the platform. 

"It's okay." She smiled weakly. "This was never any place I was meant to be. This isn't a place for 
me." 

This place Japan? This lump of stone spinning around in the blackness of space? Silently I took her 
hand and placed it on my lap, resting my hand lightly on hers. Her palm was wet. 

I forced words out: "There are some things about myself I can't explain to anyone. There are some 
things I don't understand at all. I can't tell what I think about things or what F m after. I don't know 
what my strengths are or what I' m supposed to do about them. But if I start thinking about these things 
in too much detail, the whole thing gets scary. And if I get scared, I can only think about myself. I 
become really self-centered, and without meaning to, I hurt people. So I' m not such a wonderful 
human being." 

I didn't know what else to say. And she said no thing. She seemed to wait for me to continue. She 
kept staring at the toe of her shoes. Far away, there was an ambulance siren. A station attendant was 
sweeping the platform. He didn't even look at us. It was getting late, so the trains were few. 

'T enjoyed myself with you," I said. "It's true, really. I don't know how to put this, but you strike 
me as a real person. I don't know why. Just being with you and talking, you know." 

She looked up and stared at me. 

'T didn't put you on the wrong train on purpose," I said. "I just wasn't thinking." 
She nodded. 

"FH call you tomorrow," I said. "We can go somewhere and talk." 

She wiped away the traces of her tears and slipped her hands in her pockets. "Thankyou. Fm sorry 
for everything." 

"You shouldn't apologize. It was my mistake." 

We parted. I stayed on the bench and smoked my last cigarette, then threw the empty pack in the 
trash. It was close to midnight. 

Nine hours later, I realized my second error of the evening. A fatal miss. Fm so stupid. Together 
with the cigarette pack, I'd thrown away the disco matches with her phone number on them. I checked 
everywhere. I went to the warehouse, but they didn't have her number. I tried the telephone directory. 
I even tried the student union at her school. No luck. 

I never saw her again, my second Chinese. 



Now THE STORY of my third Chinese. 

An acquaintance from high school, whom I mentioned earlier. A friend of a friend, whom I'd 
spoken to maybe a few times. 

This happened when I'd just turned twenty-eight. Six years after I got married. Six years during 
which time I'd laid three cats to rest. Burned how many aspirations, bundled up how much suffering 
in thick sweaters, and buried them in the ground. Ali in this fathomlessly huge city Tokyo. 

It was a chilly December afternoon. There was no wind; the air was so cold that what little light 
filtered through the clouds did nothing to clear away the gray of the city. I was heading home from the 
bank and stepped into a glass-fronted cafe on Aoyama Boulevard for a cup of coffee. I was flipping 
through the novel I'd just bought, looking up now and then, watching the passing cars. 

Then I noticed the guy standing in front of me. He was addressing me by name. 

"That is you, isn't it?" he was saying. 

I was taken aback. I answered in the affirmative, but I couldn't place the guy. He seemed to be 
about my age, and wore a well-tailored navy blazer and a suitably colored rep tie. Something about 
the guy made him seem a little worn down. His clothes weren't old, and he didn't look exhausted. 
Nothing like that. It had more to do with his face. Which, although presentable, gave me the feeling 
that his every expression had been thrown together on the spur of the moment. Like mismatched dishes 
set out in make-do fashion on a party table. 

"Mind if I sit down?" he said, taking the seat opposite me. He fished a pack of cigarettes and a gold 
lighter from his pocket. He didn't light up, though; he merely put them on the table. "Well, remember 
me?" 

"Afraid not," I confessed. "Fm sorry, F m terrible about these things. Fm terrible with people's 
faces." 

"Or maybe you' d just rather forget the past. Subliminally, that is." 
"Maybe so," I said. What if I did? 

The waitress brought over a glass of water for him, and he ordered an American cofTee. Water it 
down, please, he told her. 

'T got a bad stomach. I really ought to quit smoking, too," he said, fiddling with his cigarettes. He 
had that look that people with stomach troubles get when they talk about their stomach. "Anyway, like 
I was saying myself, for the same reason as you, I remember absolutely every last detail about the old 
days. It's weird, I tell you. Because believe me, some things I'd like to forget. But the more I try to 
wipe them away, the more they pop into my mind. You know what it's like when you' re trying to fail 
asleep and it only makes you more wide awake? It's the same thing. I can't figure it out. I remember 
things I couldn't possibly have known. Sometimes it worries me, remembering the past in so much 
detail — how am I supposed to have room for what's to come? My memory's so sharp, it's a 
nuisance." 

I set my book facedown on the table and sipped my coffee. 

"Everything is vivid. The weather that day, the temperature, the smells. Just like now. It gets 
confusing, like where am I? Makes me wonder if things are only memories. Ever get that feeling?" 



I shook my head absently. 

"I remember you very well. I was walking by and saw you through the glass and I knew you right 
away. Did I bother you coming in here like this?" 

"No," I said. "Still, you have to forgive me. I really don't remember you." 

"Nothing to forgive. F m the one who barged in on you. If the time comes to remember, you' 11 
remember. That's how it goes. Memory works in different ways for everybody. Different capacities, 
different directions, too. Sometimes memory helps you think, sometimes it impedes. Doesn't mean it's 
good or bad. Probably means it's no big deal." 

"Do you suppose you could tell me your name? It's simply not coming to me, and if I don't 
remember it's going to drive me crazy," I said. 

"What's a name, really?" he answered. "So if it comes, okay; if it doesn't, that's okay, too. Either 
way, no big deal, like I said. But if not remembering my name bugs you that much, pretend we've just 
met for the first time. No mental block that way." 

His coffee arrived and he drank it slowly. I couldn't get a handle at all on anything he was saying. 

"A lot of water has gone under the bridge. That phrase was in our high-school English textbook. 
Remember?" 

High school? Did I know this guy in high school? 

"F m sure that's how it went. The other day, I was standing on a bridge looking down, and suddenly 
that English phrase popped into my head. Clear as a beli. Like, sure, here' s how time passes." 

He folded his arms and sat back deep in his chair, looking inscrutable. If that expression was meant 
to convey a particular meaning, it was lost on me. The guy's expression-forming genes must have 
worn through in places. 

"Are you married?" he asked, out of nowhere. 

I nodded. 

"Kids?" 

"No." 

"Fve got a son," he said. "He's four now and goes to nursery school." 

End of conversation about children. We sat there, silent. I put a cigarette to my lips and he ofTered 
his lighter. A natural gesture. I generally don't like other people lighting my cigarettes or pouring my 
drinks, but this time I hardly paid any mind. In fact, it was a while before I even realized he'd lit my 
cigarette. 

"What line of workyou in?" 

"Business," I said. 

His mouth fell open and the word formed a second or two later. "Business?" 
"Yeah. Nothing much to speak of." I let it slide. 

He nodded and left it at that. It wasn't that I didn't want to talk about work. I just didn't feel like 
starting in on what promised to be another escapade. I was tired, and I didn't even know the guy's 
name. 

"That surprises me. You in business. I wouldn't have figured you for a businessman." 



I smiled. 

"Used to be that all you did was read books," he went on, with a bit of mystery. 

"Well, I still read a lot." I forced a laugh. 

"Encyclopedias?" 

"Encyclopedias? " 

"Sure, you got an encyclopedia?" 

"No." I shook my head, not comprehending. 

"You don't read encyclopedias?" 

"Maybe if there's one around," I said. Of course, in the place I was living there wouldn't be any 
room to have one around. 

"Actually, I sell encyclopedias," he said. 

Oh, boy, an encyclopedia salesman. Half my curiosity about the guy immediately drained away. I 
took a sip of my now-lukewarm cofTee and quietly set the cup back on its saucer. 

"You know, I wouldn't mind having a set," I said, "but unfortunately, I don't have the money. No 
money at all. I'm only just now beginning to pay off my loans." 

"Whoa there!" he said, shaking his head. "F m not trying to sell you any encyclopedia or anything. 
Me, I may be broke, but I'm not that hard up. And anyway, the truth is, I don't have to try to sell to 
Japanese. It's part of the deal I have." 

"Don't have to sell to Japanese?" 

"Right, I specialize in Chinese. I only sell encyclopedias to Chinese. I go through the Tokyo 
directory picking out Chinese names. I make a list, then go through the list one by one. I don't know 
who dreamed this scam up, but why not? Seems to work, saleswise. I ring the doorbell, I say, Ni hao, 
I hand them my card. After that, I'm in." 

Suddenly there was a click in my head. This guy was that Chinese boy I'd known in high school. 

"Strange, huh, how someone ends up walking around selling encyclopedias to Chinese? I don't 
understand it," the guy said, seeming to distance himself from the whole thing. "Sure, I can remember 
each of the little circumstances leading up to it, but the big picture, you know, how it all comes 
together moving in this one direction, escapes me. I just looked up one day and here I was." 

This guy and I had never been in the same class, nor, as I said, had we been on such close personal 
terms. But as near as I could place him, he hadn't been your encyclopedia- salesman type, either. He 
seemed well bred, got better grades than I did. Girls liked him. 

"Things happen, eh? It's a long, dark, dumb story. Nothing you' d want to hear," he said. 

The line didn't seem to demand a response, so I let it drop. 

"It's not all my doing," he picked up. "All sorts of things just piled on. But in the end, it's nobody's 
fault but mine." 

I was thinking back to high school with this guy, but all I came up with was vague scenes. I seemed 
to recall sitting around a table at someone 's house, drinking beer and talking about music. Probably 
on a summer afternoon, but more like in a dream. 

"Wonder what made me want to say hello?" he asked, half to me, twirling the lighter around on the 



table. "Guess I kind of bothered you. Sorry about that." 
"No bother at all," I said. Honestly, it wasn't. 

We both fell silent for a minute. Neither of us had anything to say. I finished my cigarette, he 
finished his coffee. 

"Well, guess FH be going," he said, pocketing his cigarettes and lighter. Then he slid backhis chair 
a bit. "Can't be spending the whole day talking. Not when there's things to sell, eh?" 

"You have a pamphlet?" I asked. 

"A pamphlet?" 

"About the encyclopedia." 

"Oh, right," he mumbled. "Not on me. You want to see one?" 

"Sure, just out of curiosity." 

"F 11 send you one. Give me your address." 

I tore out a page of my Filofax, wrote down my address, and handed it to him He looked it over, 
folded it in quarters, and slipped it into his business-card case. 

"It's a good encyclopedia, you know. Fm not just saying that because I sell them Really, it's well 
done. Lots of color photos. Very handy. Sometimes F 11 thumb through the thing myself, and I never get 
bored." 

"Someday, when my ship comes in, maybe F 11 buy one." 

"That' d be nice," he said, an election-poster smile returning to his face. "But by then, F 11 probably 
have done my time with encyclopedias. I mean, there's only so many Chinese families to visit. Maybe 
I' 11 have moved on to insurance for Chinese. Or funeral plots. What's it really matter?" 

I wanted to say something. I would never see this guy again in my life. I wanted to say something to 
him about the Chinese, but what? Nothing came. So we parted with your usual good-byes. 

Even now, I still can't think of anything to say. 



OSUPPOSING I FOUND myself chasing another fly ball and ran head-on into a basketball backboard, supposing I 
woke up once again lying under an arbor with a baseball glove under my head, what words of 
wisdom could this man of thirty-odd years bring himself to utter? Maybe something like: This is no 
place for me. 

This occurs to me while Fmriding the Yamanote Line. Fm standing by the door, holding on to my 
ticket so I won't lose it, gazing out the window at the buildings we pass. Our city, these streets, I 
don't know why it makes me so depressed. That old familiar gloom that befalls the city dweller, 
regular as due dates, cloudy as mental Jell-O. The dirty facades, the nameless crowds, the unremitting 
noise, the packed rush-hour trains, the gray skies, the billboards on every square centimeter of 
available space, the hopes and resignation, irritation and excitement. And everywhere, infmite 
options, infinite possibilities. An infmity, and at the same time, zero. We try to scoop it all up in our 



hands, and what we get is a handfiil of zero. That's the city. That's when I remember what that 
Chinese giri said. 

This was never any place I was meant to be. 

I lookat tokyo and I think China. 

That's how Fve met my share of Chinese. Fve read dozens of books on China, everything from the 
Annals to Red Star over China. Fve wanted to find out as much about China as I could. But that China 
is only my China. Not any China I can read about. It's the China that sends messages just to me. It's 
not the big yellow expanse on the globe, it's another China. Another hypothesis, another supposition. 
In a sense, it's a part of myself that's been cut off by the word China. 

I wander through China. Without ever having boarded a plane. My travels take place here in the 
Tokyo subways, in the backseat of a taxi. My adventures take me to the waiting room of the nearby 
dentist, to the bankteller's window. I can go everywhere and I don't go anywhere. 

Tokyo — one day, as I ride the Yamanote Loop, all of a sudden this city will start to go. In a flash, 
the buildings will crumble. And F 11 be holding my ticket, watching it all. Over the Tokyo streets will 
fail my China, like ash, leaching into everything it touches. Slowly, gradually, until nothing remains. 
No, this isn't a place for me. That is how we will lose our speech, how our dreams will turn to mist. 
The way our adolescence, so tedious we worried it would last forever, evaporated. 

Misdiagnosis, as a psychiatrist might say, as it was with that Chinese giri. Maybe, in the end, our 
hopes were the wrong way around. But what am I, what are you, if not a misdiagnosis? And if so, is 
there a way out? 

Even so, I have packed into a trunk my faithflil little outfielder's pride. I sit on the stone steps by 
the harbor, and I wait for that slow boat to China. It is due to appear on the blank horizon. I am 
thinking about China, the shining roofs, the verdant fields. 

Let loss and destruction come my way. They are nothing to me. I am not afraid. Any more than the 
clean-up barter fears the inside fastball, any more than the committed revolutionary fears the garrote. 
If only, if only . . . 

Oh, friends, my friends, China is so far away. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



Th e 

d a N C I N o 

d w A R F 



I\ DWARF CAME INTO my dream and asked me to dance. 

I knew this was a dream, but I was just as tired in my dream as in real life at the time. So, very 
politely, I declined. The dwarf was not offended but danced alone instead. 

He set a portable record player on the ground and danced to the music. Records were spread all 
around the player. I picked up a few from different spots in the pile. They comprised a genuine 
musical miscellany, as if the dwarf had chosen them with his eyes closed, grabbing whatever his hand 
happened to touch. And none of the records was in the right jacket. The dwarf would take half-played 
records off the turntable, throw them onto the pile without returning them to their jackets, lose track of 
which went with which, and afterward put records in jackets at random. There would be a Rolling 
Stones record in a Glenn Miller jacket, a recording of the Mi teh Miller chorus in the jacket for 
Ravel's Daphnis and Chloe. 

But none of this confusion seemed to matter to the dwarf. As long as he could dance to whatever 
was playing, he was satisfied. At the moment, he was dancing to a Charlie Parker record that had 
been in a jacket labeled Great Selections for the Classical Guitar. His body whirled like a tornado, 
sucking up the wild flurry of notes that poured from Charlie Parker 's saxophone. Eating grapes, I 
watehed him dance. 

The sweat poured out of him. Each swing of his head sent drops of sweat flying from his face; each 
wave of an arm shot streams of sweat from his fingertips. But nothing could stop him. When a record 
ended, I would set my bowl of grapes down and put on a new one. And on he would go. 

"You're a great dancer," I eried out to him. "You're music itself." 

"Thank you," he answered with a hint of affectation. 

"Do you always go at it like this?" 

"Pretty much," he said. 

Then the dwarf did a beautiful twirl on tiptoe, his soft, wavy hair flowing in the wind. I applauded. 
I had never seen such accomplished dancing in my life. The dwarf gave a respectful bow as the song 
ended. He stopped dancing and toweled himself down. The needle was elieking in the inner groove of 
the record. I lifted the tonearm and turned the player off. I put the record into the first empty jacket that 
came to hand. 

'T guess you haven't got time to hear my story," said the dwarf, glancing at me. "It's a long one." 

Unsure how to answer, I took another grape. Time was no problem for me, but I wasn't that eager 
to hear the long life story of a dwarf. And besides, this was a dream. It could evaporate at any 
moment. 

Rather than wait for me to answer, the dwarf snapped his fmgers and started to speak. "F m from 
the north country," he said. "Up north, they don't dance. Nobody knows how. They don't even realize 
that it's something you can do. But I wanted to dance. I wanted to stamp my feet and wave my arms, 
shake my head and spin around. Like this." 

The dwarf stamped his feet, waved his arms, shook his head, and spun around. Each movement was 
simple enough in itself, but in combination the four produced an almost incredible beauty of motion, 
erupting from the dwarf s body all at once, as when a globe of light bursts open. 

'T wanted to dance like this. And so I came south. I danced in the taverns. I became famous, and 
danced in the presence of the king. That was before the revolution, of course. Once the revolution 



broke out, the king passed away, as you know, and I was banished from the town to live in the forest." 

The dwarf went to the middle of the clearing and began to dance again. I put a record on. It was an 
old Frank Sinatra record. The dwarf danced, singing "Night and Day" along with Sinatra. I pictured 
him dancing before the throne. Glittering chandeliers and beautiful ladies-in-waiting, exotic fruits and 
the long spears of the royal guard, portly eunuchs, the young king in jewel-bedecked robes, the dwarf 
drenched in sweat but dancing with unbroken concentration: As I imagined the gorgeous scene, I felt 
that at any moment the roar of the revolution's cannon would echo from the distance. 

The dwarf went on dancing, and I ate my grapes. The sun set, covering the earth in the shadows of 
the forest. A huge black butterfly the size of a bird cut across the clearing and vanished into the depths 
of the forest. I felt the chill of the evening air. It was time for my dream to melt away, I knew. 

'T guess I have to go now," I said to the dwarf. 

He stopped dancing and nodded in silence. 

'T enjoyed watching you dance," I said. "Thanks a lot." 

"Anytime," said the dwarf. 

"We may never meet again," I said. "Take care of yourself." 
"Don't worry," said the dwarf. "We will meet again." 
"Are you sure?" 

"Oh, yes. YouTl be coming back here," he said with a snap of his fmgers. "YouTl live in the 
forest. And every day you'll dance with me. YouTl become a really good dancer yourself before 
long." 

"How do you know?" I asked, taken aback. 

"It's been decided," he answered. "No one has the power to change what has been decided. I know 
that you and I will meet again soon enough." 

The dwarf looked right up at me as he spoke. The deepening darkness had turned him the deep blue 
of water at night. 

"Well, then," he said. "Be seeing you." 

He turned his back to me and began dancing again, alone. 

I wokeup alone. Facedown in bed, I was drenched in sweat. There was a bird outside my window. It 
seemed different from the bird I was used to seeing there. 

I washed my face with great care, shaved, put some bread in the toaster, and boiled water for 
coffee. I fed the cat, changed its litter, put on a necktie, and tied my shoes. Then I took a bus to the 
elephant factory. 

Needless to say, the manufacture of elephants is no easy matter. They're big, first of all, and very 
complex. It's not like making hairpins or colored pencils. The factory covers a huge area, and it 
consists of several buildings. Each building is big, too, and the sections are color-coded. Assigned to 
the ear section that month, I worked in the building with the yellow ceiling and posts. My helmet and 
pants were also yellow. All I did there was make ears. The month before, I had been assigned to the 
green building, where I wore a green helmet and pants and made heads. We moved from section to 
section each month, like Gypsies. It was company policy. That way, we could all form a complete 
picture of what an elephant looked like. No one was permitted to spend his whole life making just 



ears, say, or just toenails. The executives put together the chart that controlled our movements, and we 
followed the chart. 

Making elephant heads is tremendously rewarding work. It requires enormous attention to detail, 
and at the end of the day you're so tired you don't want to talk to anybody. Fve lost as much as six 
pounds working there for a month, but it does give me a great sense of accomplishment. By 
comparison, making ears is a breeze. You just make these big, flat, thin things, put a few wrinkles in 
them, and you're done. We call working in the ear section "taking an ear break." After a monthlong 
ear break, I go to the trunk section, where the work is again very demanding. A trunk has to be 
flexible, and its nostrils must be unobstructed for its entire length. Otherwise, the finished elephant 
will go on a rampage. Which is why making the trunk is nerve-racking work from beginning to end. 

We don't make elephants from nothing, of course. Properly speaking, we reconstitute them. First 
we saw a single elephant into six distinct parts: ears, trunk, head, abdomen, legs, and tail. These we 
then recombine to make five elephants, which means that each new elephant is in fact only one-fifth 
genuine and four-fifths imitation. This is not obvious to the naked eye, nor is the elephant itself aware 
of it. We're that good. 

Why must we artificially manufacture — or, should I say, reconstitute — elephants? It is because we 
are far less patient than they are. Left to their own devices, elephants would give birth to no more than 
one baby in four or five years. And because we love elephants, of course, it makes us terribly 
impatient to see this custom — or habitual behavior — of theirs. This is what led us to begin 
reconstituting them ourselves. 

To protect the newly reconstituted elephants against improper use, they are initially purchased by 
the Elephant Supply Corporation, a publicly owned monopoly, which keeps them for two weeks and 
subjects them to a battery of highly exacting tests, after which the sole of one foot is stamped with the 
corporation's logo before the elephant is released into the jungle. We make fifteen elephants in a 
normal week. Though in the pre-Christmas season we can increase that to as many as twenty-five by 
running the machinery at fUll speed, I think that fifteen is just about right. 

As I mentioned earlier, the ear section is the easiest single phase in the elephant-manufacturing 
process. It demands little physical exertion on the part of workers, it requires no close concentration, 
and it employs no complex machinery. The number of actual operations involved is limited, as well. 
Workers can either work at a relaxed pace all day or exert themselves to meet their quota in the 
morning so as to have the afternoon free. 

My partner and I in the ear shop liked the second approach. We'd finish up in the morning and 
spend the afternoon talking or reading or amusing ourselves separately. The afternoon following my 
dream of the dancing dwarf, all we had to do was hang ten freshly wrinkled ears on the wali, after 
which we sat on the floor enjoying the sunshine. 

I told my partner about the dwarf. I remembered the dream in vivid detail and described everything 
about it to him, no matter how trivial. Where description was difficult, I demonstrated by shaking my 
head or swinging my arms or stamping my feet. He listened with frequent grunts of interest, sipping 
his tea. He was five years my senior, a strongly built fellow with a dark beard and a penchant for 
silence. He had this habit of thinking with his arms folded. Judging by the expression on his face, you 
would guess that he was a serious thinker, looking at things from all angles, but usually he'd just come 
up straight after a while and say, "That' s a tough one." Nothing more. 

He sat there thinking for a long time after I told him about my dream — so long that I started 



polishing the control panel of the electric bellows to kill time. Finally, he came up straight, as always, 
and said, "That's a tough one. Hmmm. A dancing dwarf. That's a tough one." 

This came as no great disappointment to me. I hadn't been expecting him to say any more than he 
usually did. I had just wanted to tell someone about it. I put the electric bellows back and drank my 
now-lukewarm tea. 

He went on thinking, though, for a much longer time than he normally devoted to such matters. 
"What gives?" I asked. 

"Fmpretty sure I once heard about that dwarf." 

This caught me off guard. 

"I just can't remember who told me." 

"Please try," I urged him. 

"Sure," he said, and gave it another go. 

He finally managed to recall what he knew about the dwarf three hours later, as the sun was going 
down near quitting time. 

"That's it!" he exclaimed. "The old guy in Stage Six! You know, the one who plants hairs. C'mon, 
you know: long white hair down to his shoulders, hardly any teeth. Been working here since before 
the revolution." 

"Oh," I said. "Him" I had seen him in the tavern any number of times. 

"Yeah. He told me about the dwarf way back when. Said it was a good dancer. I didn't pay much 
attention to him, figured he was senile. But now I don't know. Maybe he wasn't crazy after all." 

"So, what did he tell you?" 

"Gee, Fm not so sure. It was a long time ago." He folded his arms and fell to thinking again. But it 
was hopeless. After a while, he straightened up and said, "Can't remember. Go askhimyourself." 

Assoonas the beli rang at quitting time, I went to the Stage 6 area, but there was no sign of the old man. I 
found only two young girls sweeping the floor. The thin giri told me he had probably gone to the 
tavern, "the older one." Which is exactly where I found him, sitting very erect at the bar, drinking, 
with his lunch box beside him. 

The tavern was an old, old place. It had been there since long before I was born, before the 
revolution. For generations now, the elephant craftsmen had been coming here to drink, play cards, 
and sing. The walls were lined with photographs of the old days at the elephant factory. There was a 
picture of the first president of the company inspecting a tusk, a photo of an old-time movie queen 
visiting the factory, shots taken at summer dances, that kind of thing. The revolutionary guards had 
burned all pictures of the king and the royal family and anything else that was deemed to be royalist. 
There were pictures of the revolution, of course: the revolutionary guards occupying the factory and 
the revolutionary guards stringing up the plant superintendent. 

I found the old fellow drinking Mecatol beneath an old, discolored photo labeled THREE FACTORY BOYS POLISHING 
tusks When I took the stool next to him, the old man pointed to the photo and said, "This one is me." 

I squinted hard at the photo. The young boy on the right, maybe twelve or thirteen years old, did 
appear to be this old man in his youth. You would never notice the resemblance on your own, but 
once it had been pointed out to you, you could see that both had the same sharp nose and flat lips. 



Apparently, the old guy always sat here, and whenever he noticed an unfamiliar customer come in 
he'd say, "This one is me." 

"Looks like a real old picture," I said, hoping to draw him out. 

'"Fore the revolution," he said matter-of-factly. "Even an old guy like me was still a kid back then. 
We all get old, though. You'll looklike me before too long. Justyou wait, sonny boy!" 

He let out a great cackle, spraying spit from a wide-open mouth missing half its teeth. 

Then he launched into stories about the revolution. Obviously, he hated both the king and the 
revolutionary guards. I let him talk all he wanted, bought him another glass of Mecatol, and when the 
time was right asked him if, by any chance, he happened to know about a dancing dwarf. 

"Dancing dwarf?" he said. "You wanna hear about the dancing dwarf?" 

"I'd like to." 

His eyes glared into mine. "What the hell for?" he asked. 

"I don't know," I lied. "Somebody told me about him. Sounded interesting." 

He continued to look hard at me until his eyes reverted to the special mushy look that drunks have. 
"Awright," he said. "Why not? Ya bought me a drink. But just one thing," he said, holding a finger in 
my face, "don't tell anybody. The revolution was a hell of a long time ago, but you' re still not 
supposed to talk about the dancing dwarf. So, whatever I tell you, keep it to yourself. And don't 
mention my name. Okay?" 

"Okay." 

"Now, order me another drink and let' s go to a booth." 

I ordered two Mecatols and brought them to the booth, away from the bartender. The table had a 
green lamp in the shape of an elephant. 

"It was before the revolution," said the old man. "The dwarf came from the north country. What a 
great dancer he was! Nah, he wasn't just great at dancing. He was dancing. Nob'dy could touch 'im. 
Wind and light and fragrance and shadow: It was all there bursting inside him. That dwarf could do 
that, y'know. It was somethin' to see." 

He clicked his glass against his few remaining teeth. 

"Did you actually see him dance?" I asked. 

"Did I see him?" The old fellow stared at me, spreading the fmgers of both hands out atop the 
table. "Of course I saw him. Every day. Right here." 

"Here?" 

"You heard me. Right here. He used to dance here every day. Before the revolution." 

1 HE OLD MAN WENT ON to tell me how the dwarf had arrived from the north country without a penny in his 
pocket. He holed up in this tavern, where the elephant- factory workers gathered, doing odd jobs until 
the manager realized what a good dancer he was and hired him to dance full-time. At first, the 
workers grumbled because they wanted to have a dancing giri, but that didn't last long. With their 
drinks in their hands, they were practically hypnotized watching him dance. And he danced like 
nobody else. He could draw feelings out of his audience, feelings they hardly ever used or didn't even 
know they had. He'd bare these feelings to the light of day the way you'd puli out a fish's guts. 



The dwarf danced at this tavern for close to half a year. The place overflowed with customers who 
wanted to see him dance. And as they watched him, they would steep themselves in boundless 
happiness or be overcome with boundless grief. Soon, the dwarf had the power to manipulate 
people's emotions with a mere choice of dance step. 

Talk of the dancing dwarf eventually reached the ears of the chief of the council of nobles, a man 
who had deep ties with the elephant factory and whose fief lay nearby. From this nobleman — who, as 
it turned out, would be captured by the revolutionary guard and flung, still living, into a boiling pot of 
glue — word of the dwarf reached the young king. A lover of music, the king was determined to see the 
dwarf dance. He dispatched the vertical-induction ship with the royal crest to the tavern, and the royal 
guards carried the dwarf to the palace with the utmost respect. The owner of the tavern was 
compensated for his loss, almost too generously. The customers grumbled over their loss, but they 
knew better than to grumble to the king. Resigned, they drank their beer and Mecatol and went back to 
watching the dances of young girls. 

Meanwhile, the dwarf was given a room in the palace, where the ladies-in-waiting washed him and 
dressed him in silk and taught him the proper etiquette for appearing before the king. The next night, 
he was taken to the great hall, where the king's orchestra, upon cue, performed a polka that the king 
had composed. The dwarf danced to the polka, sedately at first, as if allowing his body to absorb the 
music, then gradually increasing the speed of his dance until he was whirling with the force of a 
tornado. People watched him, breathless. No one could speak. Several of the noble ladies fainted to 
the floor, and from the king's own hand fell a crystal goblet containing gold-dust wine, but not a 
single person noticed the sound of it shattering. 

Atthispoint in his story, the old man set his glass on the table and wiped his mouth with the back of his 
hand, then reached out for the elephant- shaped lamp and began to fiddle with it. I waited for him to 
continue, but he remained silent for several minutes. I called to the bartender and ordered more beer 
and Mecatol. The tavern was slowly filling up, and onstage a young woman singer was tuning her 
guitar. 

"Then what happened?" I asked. 

"Then?" he said. "Then the revolution started. The king was killed, and the dwarf ran away." 

I set my elbows on the table and, cradling my mug, took a long swallow of beer. I looked at the old 
man and asked, "You mean the revolution occurred just after the dwarf entered the palace?" 

"Not long after. 'Bout a year, I'd say." The old man let out a huge burp. 

'T don't get it," I said. "Before, you said that you weren't supposed to talk about the dwarf. Why is 
that? Is there some connection between the dwarf and the revolution?" 

"Ya got me there. One thing's sure, though. The revolutionary guard wanted to bring that dwarf in 
somethin' terrible. Still do. The revolution's an old story already, but they' re still lookin' for the 
dancing dwarf. Even so, I don't know what the connection is between the dwarf and the revolution. 
Ali youhear is rumors." 

"What kind of rumors?" 

I could see that he was having trouble deciding whether to tell me any more. "Rumors are just 
rumors," he said fmally "You never know what's true. But some folks say the dwarf used a kind of 
evil power on the palace, and that's what caused the revolution. Anyhow, that's all I know about the 



dwarf. Nothin' else." 

The old man let out one long hiss of a sigh, and then he drained his glass in a single gulp. The pink 
liquid oozed out at the corners of his mouth, dripping down into the sagging collar of his undershirt. 

I didnt dream about the dwarf again. I went to the elephant factory every day as usual and continued 
making ears, first softening an ear with steam, then flattening it with a press hammer, cutting out five 
ear shapes, adding the ingredients to make five full-size ears, drying them, and fmally, adding 
wrinkles. At noon, my partner and I would break to eat our pack lunches and talk about the new giri in 
Stage 8. 

There were lots of girls working at the elephant factory, most of them assigned to splicing nervous 
systems or machine stitching or cleanup. We'd talk about them whenever we had free time. And 
whenever they had free time, they'd talk about us. 

"Great-looking giri," my partner said. "Ali the guys've got their eye on her. But nobody's nailed 
her yet." 

"Can she really be that good-looking?" I asked. I had my doubts. Any number of times I had made a 
point of going to see the latest "knockout," who turned out to be nothing much. This was one kind of 
rumor you could never trust. 

"No lie," he said. "Check her out yourself. If you don't think she's a beauty, go to Stage Six and get 
a new pair of eyes. Wish I didn't have a wife. I'd get her. Or die tryin'." 

Lunch break was almost over, but as usual my section had almost no work left for the afternoon so I 
cooked up an excuse to go to Stage 8. To get there, you had to go through a long underground tunnel. 
There was a guard at the tunnel entrance, but he knew me from way back, so I had no trouble getting 
in. 

The far end of the tunnel opened on a riverbank, and the Stage 8 building was a little ways 
downstream Boththe roof and the smokestack were pink. Stage 8 made elephant legs. Having worked 
there just four months earlier, I knew the layout well. The young guard at the entrance was a 
newcomer I had never seen before, though. 

"What's your business?" he demanded. In his crisp uniform, he looked like a typical new-broom 
type, determined to enforce the rules. 

"We ran out of nerve cable," I said, clearing my throat. "I'm here to borrow some." 

"That's weird," he said, glaring at my uniform. "You' re in the ear section. Cable from the ear and 
leg sections shouldn'tbe interchangeable." 

"Well, let me try to make a long story short. I was originally planning to borrow cable from the 
trunk section, but they didn't have any extra. And they were out of leg cable, so they said if I could get 
them a reel of that, they'd let me have a reel of the fme stuff. When I called here, they said they have 
extra leg cable, so that's why I'm here." 

The guard flipped through the pages of his clipboard. 'T haven't heard anything about this," he said. 
"These things are supposed to be arranged beforehand." 

"That's strange. It has been. Somebody goofed. IT1 tell the guys inside to straighten it out." 

The guard just stood there whining. I warned him that he was slowing down production and that I 
would hold him responsible if somebody from upstairs got on my back. Finally, still grumbling, he let 



me in. 

Stage 8 — the leg shop — was housed in a low-set, spacious building, a long, narrow place with a 
partially sunken sandy floor. Inside, your eyes were at ground level, and narrow glass windows were 
the only source of illumination. Suspended from the ceiling were movable rails from which hung 
dozens of elephant legs. If you squinted up at them, it looked as if a huge herd of elephants was 
winging down from the sky. 

The whole shop had no more than thirty workers altogether, both men and women. Everybody had 
on hats and masks and goggles, so in the gloom it was impossible to tell which one was the new giri. I 
recognized one guy I used to work with and asked him where I could find her. 

"She's the giri at Bench Fifteen attaching toenails," he said. "But if you' re planning to put the make 
onher, forget it. She's hard as nails. Youhaven't got a chance." 

"Thanks for the advice," I said. 

The giri at Bench 1 5 was a slim little thing. She looked like a boy in a medieval painting. 

"Excuse me," I said. She looked at me, at my uniform, at my shoes, and then up again. Then she 
took her hat off, and her goggles. She was incredibly beautiflil. Her hair was long and curly; her eyes 
were as deep as the ocean. 

"Yes?" 

"I was wondering if you' d like to go out dancing with me tomorrow night. Saturday. If you're free." 
"Well, I am free tomorrow night, and I am going to go dancing, but not with you." 
"Have you got a date with someone else?" 

"Not at all," she said. Then she put her goggles and hat back on, picked up an elephant toenail from 
her bench, and held it against a foot, checking the fit. The nail was just a little too wide, so she filed it 
down with a few quick strokes. 

"C'mon," I said. "If you haven't got a date, go with me. It's more fun than going alone. And I know 
a good restaurant we could go to." 

"That's all right. I want to dance by myself. If you want to dance, too, there's nothing stopping you 
from coming." 

"Iwill/'Isaid. 

"It's up to you," she said. 

Ignoring me, she continued to work. Now she pressed the filed nail into the hollow at the front of 
the foot. This time, it fit perfectly. 

"Pretty good for a beginner," I said. 

She didn't answer me. 

That night, the dwarf came into my dream again, and again I knew it was a dream. He was sitting on a 
log in the middle of the clearing in the forest, smoking a cigarette. This time he had neither record 
player nor records. There were signs of weariness in his face that made him look a little more 
advanced in years than he had when I first saw him — though in no way could he be taken for someone 
who had been born before the revolution. He looked perhaps two or three years older than me, but it 
was hard to tell. That's the way it is with dwarfs. 



For lack of anything better to do, I strolled around the dwarf, looked up at the sky, and fmally sat 
down beside him. The sky was gray and overcast, and black clouds were drifting westward. It might 
have begun to rain at any time. The dwarf had probably put away the records and player to keep them 
from being rained on. 

"Hi," I said to the dwarf. 

"Hi," he answered. 

"Not dancing today?" I asked. 

"No, not today," he said. 

When he wasn't dancing, the dwarf was a feeble, sad-looking creature. You would never guess that 
he had once been a proud figure of authority in the royal palace. 

"You look a little sick," I said. 

'T am," he replied. "It can be very cold in the forest. When you live alone for a long time, different 
things start to affect your health." 

"That' s terrible," I said. 

'T need energy. I need a new source of energy flowing in my veins — energy that will enable me to 
dance and dance, to get wet in the rain without catching cold, to run through the fields and hills. That' s 
what I need." 

"Gosh," I said. 

We sat on the log for a long time, saying nothing. From far overhead, I heard the wind in the 
branches. Flitting among the trunks of the trees, a huge butterfly would appear and disappear. 

"Anyhow," he said, "you wanted me to do something for you." 

"I did?" I had no idea what he was talking about. 

The dwarf picked up a branch and drew a star on the ground. "The giri," he said. "You want the 
giri, don'tyou?" 

He meant the pretty new giri in Stage 8. 1 was amazed that he knew so much. Of course, this was a 
dream, so anything could happen. 

"Sure, I want her. But I can't ask you to help me get her. I' 11 have to do it myself." 

"You can't." 

"What makes you so sure?" 

"I know," he said. "Go ahead and get angry, but the fact is you can't do it yourself." 

He might be right, I thought. I was so ordinary. I had nothing to be proud of — no money, no good 
looks, no special way with words, even — nothing special at all. True, I wasn't a bad guy, and I 
worked hard. The people at the factory liked me. I was strong and healthy. But I wasn't the type that 
girls go crazy over at first sight. How could a guy like me ever hope to get his hands on a beauty like 
that? 

"You know," the dwarf whispered, "if you let me help you, it just might work out." 
"Help me? How?" He had aroused my curiosity. 

"By dancing. She likes dancing. Show her you' re a good dancer and she's yours. Then you just 
stand beneath the tree and wait for the fruit to fail into your hands." 



"You mean you'll teach me to dance?" 

"I don't mind," he said. "But a day or two of practice won't do you any good. It takes six months at 
least, and then only if you work at it all day, every day. That's what it takes to capture someone's 
heart by dancing." 

I shook my head. "It's no use, then," I said. "If I have to wait six months, some other guy will get 
her for sure." 

"When do you go dancing?" 

"Tomorrow night. Saturday. She'll be going to the dance hall, and I will, too. F 11 ask her to dance 
withme." 

The dwarf used the branch to draw a number of vertical lines in the dirt. Then he bridged them with 
a horizontal line to make a strange diagram. Silent, I followed the movement of his hand. The dwarf 
spit the butt of his cigarette on the ground and crushed it with his foot. 

"There's a way to do it — if you really want her," he said. "You want her, don't you?" 

"Sure I do." 

"Want me to tell you how it can be done?" 
"Please. I'd like to know." 

"It's simple, really. I just get inside you. I use your body to dance. You' re healthy and strong: You 
should be able to manage a little dancing." 

'T am in good shape. Nobody better," I said. "But can you really do such a thing — get inside me 
and dance?" 

"Absolutely. And then she's yours. I guarantee it. And not just her. You can have any giri." 

I licked my lips. It sounded too good to be true. If I let the dwarf get inside me, he might never 
come out. My body could be taken over by this dwarf. As much as I wanted the giri, I was not willing 
to let that happen. 

"You' re scared," he said, as if reading my mind. "You think I' 11 take possession of your body." 
"I've heard things about you," I said. 
"Bad things, I suppose." 
"Yes, bad things." 

He gave me a sly smile. "Don't worry. I may have power, but I can't just take over a person's body 
once and for all. An agreement is required for that. I can't do it unless both parties agree. You don't 
want your body permanently taken over, do you?" 

"No, of course not," I said with a shiver. 

"And I don't want to help you get your giri without any kind of compensation." The dwarf raised a 
fmger. "But I' 11 do it on one condition. It's not such a difficult condition, but it is a condition 
nonetheless." 

"What is it?" 

'T get into your body. We go to the dance hall. You ask her to join you and you captivate her with 
your dancing. Then you take her. But you' re not allowed to say a word from beginning to end. You 
can't make a sound until you've gone all the way with her. That's the one condition." 



"How am I supposed to seduce her if I can't say a word to her?" I protested. 

"Don't worry," said the dwarf, shaking his head. "As long as you have me dancing for you, you can 
get any woman without opening your mouth. So, from the time you set foot in the dance hall to the 
moment you make her yours, you are absolutely forbidden to use your voice." 

"And if I do?" 

"Thenyour body is mine," he said, as if stating the obvious. 

"And if I do the whole thing without making a sound?" 

"Then the giri is yours, and I leave your body and go back to the forest." 

I released a deep, deep sigh. What was I to do? While I wrestled with the question, the dwarf 
scratched another strange diagram into the earth. A butterfly came and rested on it, exactly in the 
center. I confess I was afraid. I could not say for certain that I would be able to keep silent from 
beginning to end. But I knew it was the only way for me to hold that gorgeous giri in my arms. I 
pictured her in Stage 8, filing the elephant toenail. I had to have her. 

"Ali right," I said. 'T 11 do it." 

"That' s it," said the dwarf. "We've got our agreement." 

1 HE DANCE HALL STOOD by the main factory gate, its floor always packed on a Saturday night with the young men 
and women who worked at the elephant factory. Virtually all of us unattached workers, both male and 
female, would come here every week to dance and drink and talk with our friends. Couples would 
eventually slip out to make love in the woods. 

How I've missed this! the dwarf sighed within me. This is what dancing is all about — the crowd, 
the drinks, the lights, the smell of sweat, the girls ' perfume. Oh, it takes me back! 

I cut through the crowd, searching for her. Friends who noticed me would clap me on the shoulder 
and call out to me. I responded to each with a big, friendly smile but said nothing. Before long, the 
band started playing, but still there was no sign of her. 

Take it slow, said the dwarf. The night is young. You 've got plenty to look forward to. 

The dance floor was a large, motorized circle that rotated very slowly. Chairs and tables were set 
in rows around its outer edge. Over it, a large chandelier hung from the high ceiling, the immaculately 
polished wood of the floor reflecting its brilliance like a sheet of ice. Beyond the circle rose the 
bandstand, like bleachers in an arena. On it were arranged two fiill orchestras that would alternate 
playing every thirty minutes, providing lush dance music all evening without a break. The one on the 
right featured two complete drum sets, and all the musicians wore the same red elephant logo on their 
blazers. The main attraction of the left-hand orchestra was a ten-member trombone section, and this 
troupe wore green elephant masks. 

I found a seat and ordered a beer, loosening my tie and lighting a cigarette. The dance-hall girls, 
who danced for a fee, would approach my table now and then and invite me to dance, but I ignored 
them. Chin in hand, and taking an occasional sip of beer, I waited for the giri to come. 

An hour went by, and still she failed to show. A parade of songs crossed the dance floor — waltzes, 
fox-trots, a battle of the drummers, high trumpet solos — all wasted. I began to feel that she might have 
been toying with me, that she had never intended to come here to dance. 

Don 't worry, whispered the dwarf. She 'U be here. Just relax. 



The hands of the clock had moved past nine before she showed herself in the dance-hall door. She 
wore a tight, shimmering one-piece dress and blackhigh heels. The entire dance hall seemed ready to 
vanish in a white blur, she was so sparkling and sexy. First one man, then another and another, spotted 
her and approached to offer himself as an escort, but a single wave of the hand sent each of them back 
into the crowd. 

I followed her movements as I sipped my beer. She sat at a table directly across the dance floor 
from me, ordered a red-colored cocktail, and lit a long cigarette. She hardly touched the drink, and 
when she finished the cigarette she crushed it out without lighting another. Then she stood and 
proceeded toward the dance floor, slowly, with the readiness of a diver approaching the high 
platform. 

She danced alone. The orchestra played a tango. She moved to the music with mesmerizing grace. 
Whenever she bent low, her long, black, curly hair swept past the floor like the wind, and her slender 
fmgers stroked the strings of an invisible harp that floated in the air. Utterly unrestrained, she danced 
by herself, for herself. I couldn't take my eyes off her. It felt like the continuation of my dream. I grew 
confused. If I was using one dream to create another, where was the real me in all this? 

She 's a great dancer, said the dwarf. It 's worth doing it with somebody like her. Let 's go. 

Hardly conscious of my movements, I stood and left my table for the dance floor. Shoving my way 
past a number of men, I came up beside her and clicked my heels to signal to the others that I intended 
to dance. She cast a glance at me as she whirled, and I flashed her a smile to which she did not 
respond. Instead, she went on dancing alone. 

I started dancing, slowly at first, but gradually faster and faster until I was dancing like a 
whirlwind. My body no longer belonged to me. My arms, my legs, my head, all moved wildly over 
the dance floor unconnected to my thoughts. I gave myself to the dance, and all the while I could hear 
distinctly the transit of the stars, the shifting of the tides, the racing of the wind. This was truly what it 
meant to dance. I stamped my feet, swung my arms, tossed my head, and whirled. A globe of white 
light burst open inside my head as I spun round and round. 

Again she glanced at me, and then she was whirling and stamping with me. The light was exploding 
inside her, too, I knew. I was happy. I had never been so happy. 

This is a lot more fun than working in some elephant factory, isn 't it? said the dwarf. 

I said nothing in return. My mouth was so dry, I couldn't have spoken if I had tried to. 

We went on dancing, hour after hour. I led, she followed. Time seemed to have given way to 
eternity. Eventually, she stopped dancing, looking utterly drained. She took my arm, and I — or, should 
I say, the dwarf — stopped dancing, too. Standing in the very center of the dance floor, we gazed into 
each other's eyes. She bent over to remove her high heels, and with them dangling from her hand, she 
looked at me again. 

We LEFT THE DANCE HALL and walked along the river. I had no car, so we just kept walking and walking. Soon 
the road began its gradual climb into the hills. The air became filled with the perfume of white night- 
blooming flowers. I turned to see the dark shapes of the factory spread out below. From the dance 
hall, yellow light spilled out onto its immediate surroundings like so much pollen, and one of the 
orchestras was playing a jump tune. The wind was soft, and the moonlight seemed to drench her hair. 

Neither of us spoke. After such dancing, there was no need to say anything. She clung to my arm 



like a blind person being led along the road. 

Topping the hill, the road led into an open field surrounded by pine woods. The broad expanse 
looked like a calm lake. Evenly covered in waist-high grass, the field seemed to dance in the night 
wind. Here and there a shining flower poked its head into the moonlight, calling out to insects. 

Putting my arm around her shoulders, I led her to the middle of the grassy field, where, without a 
word, I lowered her to the ground. "You're not much of a talker," she said with a smile. She tossed 
her shoes away and wrapped her arms around my neck. I kissed her on the lips and drew back from 
her, looking at her face once again. She was beautiful, as beautiful as a dream. I still could not 
believe I had her in my arms like this. She closed her eyes, waiting for me to kiss her again. 

That was when her face began to change. A fleshy white thing crept out of one nostril. It was a 
maggot, an enormous maggot, larger than any I had ever seen before. Then came another and another, 
emerging from both her nostrils, and suddenly the stench of death was all around us. Maggots were 
falling from her mouth to her throat, crawling across her eyes and burrowing into her hair. The skin of 
her nose slipped away, the flesh beneath melting until only two dark holes were left. From these, still 
more maggots struggled to emerge, their pale white bodies smeared with the rotting flesh that 
surrounded them. 

Pus began to pour from her eyes, the sheer force of it causing her eyeballs to twitch, then fail and 
dangle to either side of her face. In the gaping cavern behind the sockets, a clot of maggots like a ball 
of white string swarmed in her rotting brain. Her tongue dangled from her mouth like a huge slug, then 
festered and fell away. Her gums dissolved, the white teeth dropping out one by one, and soon the 
mouth itself was gone. Blood spurted from the roots of her hair, and then each hair fell out. From 
beneath the slimy scalp, more maggots ate their way through to the surface. Arms locked around me, 
the giri never loosened her grip. I struggled vainly to free myself, to avert my face, to close my eyes. 
A hardened lump in my stomach rose to my throat, but I could not disgorge it. I felt as if the skin of my 
body had turned inside out. By my ear resounded the laughter of the dwarf. 

The girl's face continued to melt until suddenly the jaw popped open, as if from a sudden twisting 
of the muscles, and clots of liquefied flesh and pus and maggots sprang in all directions. 

I sucked my breath in to let out a scream. I wanted someone — anyone — to drag me away from this 
unbearable hell. In the end, however, I did not scream This can't be happening, I said to myself. This 
can't be real, I knew almost intuitively The dwarf is doing this. He's trying to trick me. He's trying to 
make me use my voice. One sound, and my body will be his forever. That is exactly what he wants. 

Now I knew what I had to do. I closed my eyes — this time without the least resistance — and I could 
hear the wind moving across the grassy field. The girl's fingers were digging into my back. Now I 
wrapped my arms around her and drew her to me with all my strength, planting a kiss upon the 
suppurating flesh where it seemed to me her mouth had once been. Against my face I could feel the 
slippery flesh and the maggoty lumps; my nostrils filled with a putrid smell. But this lasted only a 
moment. When I opened my eyes, I found myself kissing the beautiful giri I had come here with. Her 
pink cheeks glowed in the soft moonlight. And I knew that I had defeated the dwarf. I had done it all 
without making a sound. 

You win, said the dwarf in a voice drained of energy. She 's yours. I 'm leaving your body now. 
And he did. 

"But you haven't seen the last of me," he went on. "You can win as often as you like. But you can 
only lose once. Then it's the end for you. And you will lose. The day is bound to come. F 11 be 



waiting, no matter how long it takes." 

"Why does it have to be me?" I shouted back. "Why can't it be someone else?" 

But the dwarf said nothing. He only laughed. The sound of his laughter floated in the air until the 
wind swept it away. 

Intheend, the dwarf was right. Every policeman in the country is out looking for me now. Someone who 
saw me dancing — maybe the old man — reported to the authorities that the dwarf had danced in my 
body The police started watching me, and everyone who knew me was called in for questioning. My 
partner testified that I had once told him about the dancing dwarf. A warrant went out for my arrest. 
The police surrounded the factory The beautiflil giri from Stage 8 came secretly to warn me. I ran 
from the shop and dove into the pool where the fmished elephants are stockpiled. Clinging to the back 
of one, I fled into the forest, crushing several policemen on the way. 

For almost a month now, Fve been running from forest to forest, mountain to mountain, eating 
berries and bugs, drinking water from the river to keep myself alive. But there are too many 
policemen. They're bound to catch me sooner or later. And when they do, they'll strap me to the 
winch and tear me to pieces. Or so Fmtold. 

The dwarf comes into my dreams every night and orders me to let him inside me. 

"At least that way, you won't be arrested and dismembered by the police," he says. 

"No, but then F 11 have to dance in the forest forever." 

"True," says the dwarf, "but you' re the one who has to make that choice." 

He chuckles when he says this, but I can't make the choice. 

I hear the dogs howling now. They're almost here. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



The 
L AS T 

L A W N 

O F 
Th e 

AFTErnoON 



I must have been eighteen or nineteen when I mowed lawns, a good fourteen or fifteen years ago. Ancient 
history. 

Sometimes, though, fourteen or fifteen years doesn't seemso long ago. I' 11 think, that's when Jim 
Morrison was singing "Light My Fire," or Paul McCartney "The Long and Winding Road" — maybe 
F m scrambling my years a bit, but anyway, about that time — it somehow never quite hits that it was 
really all that long ago. I mean, I don't think I myself have changed so much since those days. 

No, I take that back. F m sure I must have changed a lot. There'd be too many things I couldn't 
explain if I hadn't. 

Okay, Fve changed. And these things happened all of fourteen, fifteen years back. 

In my neighborhood — I'd just recently moved there — we had a public junior high school, and 
whenever I went out to run shopping errands or take a walk I'd pass right by it. So I'd find myself 
looking at the junior-high kids exercising or drawing pictures or just goofing off. Not that I especially 
enjoyed looking at them; there wasn't anything else to look at. I could just as well have looked at the 
line of cherry trees off to the right, but the junior-high kids were more interesting. 

So as things went, looking at these junior-high- school kids every day, one day it struck me. They 
were all just fourteen or fifteen years old. It was a minor discovery for me, something of a shock. 
Fourteen or fifteen years ago, they weren't even born; or if they were, they were little more than 
semiconscious blobs of pink flesh. And here they were now, already wearing brassieres, 
masturbating, sending stupid little postcards to disc jockeys, smoking out in back of the gym, writing 
fuck on somebody's fence with red spray paint, reading — maybe — War and Peace. Phew, glad that's 
done with. 

I really meant it. Phew. 

Me, back fourteen or fifteen years ago, I was mowing lawns. 

Me MORY IS LIKE FICTION; or else it's fiction that's like memory. This really came home to me once I started 
writing fiction, that memory seemed a kind of fiction, or vice versa. Either way, no matter how hard 
you try to put everything neatly into shape, the context wanders this way and that, until finally the 
context isn't even there anymore. You' re left with this pile of kittens lolling all over one another. 
Warm with life, hopelessly unstable. And then to put these things out as saleable items, you call them 
finished products — at times it's downright embarrassing just to think of it. Honestly, it can make me 
blush. And if my face turns that shade, you canbe sure everyone's blushing. 

Still, you grasp human existence in terms of these rather absurd activities resting on relatively 
straightforward motives, and questions of right and wrong pretty much drop out of the picture. That's 
where memory takes over and fiction is born. From that point on, it's a perpetual-motion machine no 
one can stop. Tottering its way throughout the world, trailing a single unbroken thread over the 
ground. 

Here goes nothing. Hope all goes well, you say. But it never has. Never will. It just doesn't go that 
way. 

So where does that leave you? What do you do? 

What is there to do? I just go back to gathering kittens and piling them up again. Exhausted kittens, 
all limp and played out. But even if they woke to discover themselves stacked like kindling for a 
campfire, what would the kittens think? Well, it might scarcely raise a "Hey, what gives?" out of 



them. In which case — if there was nothing to particularly get upset about — it would make my work a 
little easier. That's the way I see it. 

f\7 EIGHTEEN OR NINETEEN I mowed lawns, so we're talking ancient history. Around that time I had a girlfriend 
the same age, but a simple turn of events had taken her to live in a town way out of the way. Out of a 
whole year we could get together maybe two weeks total. In that short time we'd have sex, go to the 
movies, wine and dine at some pretty fancy places, tell each other things nonstop, one thing after the 
next. And in the end we'd always cap it off with one hell of a fight, then make up, and have sex again. 
In other words, we'd be doing what most any couple does, only in a condensed version, like a short 
feature. 

At this point in time, I don't actually know if I really and truly loved her or not. Oh, I can bring her 
to mind, all right, but I just don't know. These things, they happen. I liked eating out with her, liked 
watching her take off her clothes one piece at a time, liked how soft it felt inside her vagina. And after 
sex, I liked just looking at her with her head on my chest, talking softly until she'd fail asleep. But 
that's all. Beyond that, I'mnot sure of one single thing. 

Save for that two-week period I was seeing her, my life was excruciatingly monotonous. I'd go to 
the university whenever I had classes and got more or less average marks. Maybe go to the movies 
alone, or stroll the streets for no special reason, or take some giri I got along with out on a date — no 
sex. Never much for loud get-togethers, I was always said to be on the quiet side. When I was by 
myself, I'd listen to rock 'n' roli, nothing else. Happy enough, I guess, though probably not so very 
happy. But at the time, that was about what you'd expect. 

One summer morning, the beginning of July, I got this long letter from my girlfriend, and in it she'd 
written that she wanted to break up with me. Fve always felt close to you, and I still like you even 
now, and I' m sure that from here on I' 11 continue to . . . et cetera, et cetera. In short, she was wanting to 
break it off. She had found herself a new boyfriend. I hung my head and smoked six cigarettes, went 
outside and drank a can of beer, came back in and smoked another cigarette. Then I took three HB 
pencils I had on my desk and snapped them in half. It wasn't that I was angry, really. I just didn't 
know what to do. In the end, I merely changed clothes and headed off to work. And for a while there, 
everyone within shouting distance was commenting on my suddenly "outgoing disposition." What is it 
about life? 

That year I had a part-time job for a lawn-care service near Kyodo Station on the Odakyu Line, 
doing a fairly good business. Most people, when they built houses in the area, put in lawns. That, or 
they kept dogs. The two things seemed mirror alternatives. (Although there were folks who did both.) 
Each had its own advantages: A green lawn is a thing of beauty; a dog is cute. But half a year passes, 
and things start to drag on everyone. The lawn needs mowing, and you have to walk the dog. Not quite 
what they bargained for. 

Well, as it ended up, we mowed lawns for these people. The summer before, I'd found the job 
through the student union at the university. Besides me, a whole slew of others had come in at the 
same time, but they all quit soon thereafter; only I stayed on. It was demeaning work, but the pay 
wasn't bad. What's more, you could get by pretty much without talking to anyone. Just made for me. 
Since joining on there, I'd managed to save up a tidy little sum. Enough for my girlfriend and me to 
take a trip somewhere that summer. But now that she'd called the whole thing off, what difference did 
it make? For a week or so after I got her good-bye letter, I tried thinking up all sorts of ways to use 
the money. Or rather, I didn't have anything better to think about than how to spend the money. A lost 



week it was. My penis looked like any other guy's penis. But somebody — a somebody I didn't know 
— was nibbling at her little nipples. Strange sensation. What was wrong with me? 

I was hard-pressed to come up with some way of spending the money. There was a deal to buy 
someone's used car — a lOOOcc Subaru — not bad condition and the right price, but somehow I just 
didn't feel like it. I also thought of buying new speakers, but in my tiny apartment with its wood-and- 
plasterboard walls, what would have been the point? I guess I could have moved, but I didn't really 
have any reason to. And even if I did up and move out of my apartment, there wouldn't have been 
enough money left over to buy the speakers. 

There just wasn't any way to spend the money. I bought myself a polo shirt and a few records, and 
the whole rest of the lump remained. So then I bought a really good Sony transistor radio — big 
speakers, clear FM reception, the works. 

The whole week went past before it struck me. The fact of the matter was that if I bad no way of 
spending the money, there was no point in my earning it. 

So one morning I broached the matter to the head of the lawn-mowing company, told him I'd like to 
quit. It was getting on time when I had to begin studying for exams, and before that I'd been thinking 
about taking a trip. I wasn't about to say that I didn't want the money anymore. 

"Well, now, sorry to hear that," said the head exec (I guess you'd call him that, although he seemed 
more like your neighborhood gardening man). Then he let out a sigh and sat down in his chair to take a 
puflf of his cigarette. He looked up at the ceiling and craned his neck stiffly from side to side. "You 
really and truly do fine work. You' re the heart of the operation, the best of my part-timers. Got a good 
reputation with the customers, too. What can I say? You've done a tremendous job for someone so 
young." 

Thanks, I told him. Actually, I did have a good reputation. That's because I did meticulous work. 
Most part-timers give the grass a thorough once-over with a big electric lawn mower and do only a 
mediocre job on the remaining areas. That way, they get done quickly without wearing themselves 
out. My method was exactly the opposite. I'd rough in with the mower, then put time into the hand 
trimming. So naturally, the flnished product looked nice. The only thing was that the take was small, 
seeing as the pay was calculated at so much per job. The price went by the approximate area of the 
yard. And what with all that bending and stooping, my back would get plenty sore. It's the sort of 
thing you have to be in the business to really understand. So much so that until you get used to it, you 
have trouble going up and down stairs. 

Now, I didn't do such meticulous work especially to build a reputation. You probably won't 
believe me, but I simply enjoy mowing lawns. Every morning, I'd hone the grass clippers, head out to 
the customers in a minivan loaded with a lawn mower, and cut the grass. There's all kinds of yards, 
all kinds of turf, all kinds of housewives. Quiet, thoughtful housewives and ones who shoot off their 
mouths. There were even your housewives who'd crouch down right in front of me in loose T-shirts 
and no bra so that I could see all the way to their nipples. 

No matter, I kept on mowing the lawn. Generally, the grass in the yard would be pretty high. 
Overgrown like a thicket. The taller the grass, the more rewarding I'd find the job. When the job was 
finished, the yard would yield an entirely different impression. Gives you a really great feeling. It's as 
if a thick bank of clouds has suddenly lifted, letting in the sun all around. 

One time and one time only — after I'd done my work — did I ever sleep with one of these 
housewives. Thirty-one, maybe thirty-two she was, petite, with small, firmbreasts. She closed all the 



shutters, turned out the lights, and we made it in the pitch-blackness. Even so, she kept on her dress, 
merely slipping off her underwear. She got on top of me, but wouldn't let me touch her anywhere 
below her breasts. And her body was incredibly cold; only her vagina was warm She hardly spoke a 
word. I, too, kept silent. There was just the rustling of her dress, now slower, now faster. The 
telephone rang midway. The ringing went on for a while, then stopped. 

Later, I wondered if my girlfriend and I breaking up mightn't have been on account of that interlude. 
Not that there was any particular reason to think so. It somehow just occurred to me. Probably 
because of the phone call that went unanswered. Well, whatever, it's all over and done with. 

"This really leaves me in a fix, you know," said my boss. "If you puli out now, I won't be able to 
stir up business. And it's peak season, too." 

The rainy season really made lawns grow like crazy. 

"What do you say? How about one more week? Give me a week. I' 11 be able to fmd some new 
hands, and everything'll be okay. If you'd just do that for me, I'll give you a bonus." 

Fine, I told him. I didn't especially have any other plans for the time being, and above all, I had no 
objections to the work itself. All the same, I couldn't help thinking what an odd turn of events this 
was: The minute I decide I don't need money, the dough starts pouring in. 

Clear weather three days in a row, then one day of rain, then three more days of clear weather. So 
went my last week on the job. It was summer, though nothing special as summers go. Clouds drifted 
across the sky like distant memories. The sun broiled my skin. My back peeled three times, and by 
then I was tanned dark all over. Even behind my ears. 

The morning of my last day of work found me in my usual gear — T-shirt and shorts, tennis shoes, 
sunglasses — only now as I climbed into the minivan, I was heading out for what would be my last 
lawn. The car radio was on the blink, so I brought along my transistor radio from home for some 
driving music. Creedence, Grand Funk, your regular AM rock. Everything revolved around the 
summer sun. I whistled along with snatches of the music, and smoked when not whistling. An FEN 
newscaster was stumbling over a rapid-fire list of the most impossible-to-pronounce Vietnamese 
place-names. 

My last job was near Yomiuri Land Amusement Park. Fine by me. Don't ask why someone living 
over the line in Kanagawa Prefecture felt compelled to call a Setagaya Ward lawn-mowing service. I 
had no right to complain, though. I mean, I myself chose that job. Go into the office first thing in the 
morning, and all the day's jobs would be written up on a blackboard; each person then signed up for 
the places he wanted to work. Most of the crew generally chose places nearby. Less time back and 
forth, so they could squeeze in more jobs. Me, on the other hand, I chose jobs as far away as I could. 
Always. And that always puzzled everyone. But like I said before, I was the lead guy among the part- 
timers, so I got first choice of any jobs I wanted. 

No reason for choosing what I did, really. I just liked mowing lawns farther away. I enjoyed the 
time on the road, enjoyed a longer look at the scenery on the way. I wasn't about to tell anyone that — 
who would' ve understood? 

I drove with all the windows open. The wind grew brisk as I headed out of the city, the 
surroundings greener. The simmering heat of the lawns and the smell of dry dirt came on stronger; the 
clouds were outlined sharp against the sky. Fantastic weather. Perfect for taking a little summer day 
trip with a giri somewhere. I thought about the cool sea and the hot sands. And then I thought of a cozy 



air-conditioned room with crisp blue sheets on the bed. That's all. Aside from that, I didn't think 
about a thing. My head was all beach and blue sheets. 

I went on thinking about these very things while getting the tank filled at a gas station. I stretched 
out on a nearby patch of grass and casually watched the attendant check the oil and wipe the 
windows. Putting my ear to the ground, I could hear all kinds of things. I could even hear what 
sounded like distant waves, though of course it wasn't. Only the rumble of all the different sounds the 
earth sucked in. Right in front of my eyes, a bug was inching along a blade of grass. A tiny green bug 
with wings. The bug paused when it reached the end of the grass blade, thought things over awhile, 
then decided to go back the same way it came. Didn't look all that particularly upset. 

Wonder if the heat gets to bugs, too? 

Who knows? 

In ten minutes, the tank was full, and the attendant honked the horn to let me know. 

My destination address turned out to be up in the hills. Gentle, stately hills, rolling down to rows of 
zelkova trees on either flank. In one yard, two small boys in their birthday suits showering each other 
with a hose. The spray made a strange little two-foot rainbow in the air. From an open window came 
the sound of someone practicing the piano. Quite beautiflilly, too; you could almost mistake it for a 
record. 

I pulled the van to a stop in front of the appointed house, got out, and rang the doorbell. No answer. 
Everything was dead quiet. Not a soul in sight, kind of like siesta time in a Latin country. I rang the 
doorbell one more time. Then I just kept on waiting. 

It seemed a nice enough little house: cream-colored plaster walls with a square chimney of the 
same color sticking up from right in the middle of the roof. White curtains hung in the windows, which 
were framed in gray, though both were sun-bleached beyond belief. It was an old house, a house all 
the more becoming for its age. The sort of house you often find at summer resorts, occupied half the 
year and left empty the other half. You know the type. There was a lived-in air to the house that gave 
it its charm 

The yard was enclosed by a waist-high French-brick wali topped by a rosebush hedge. The roses 
had completely fallen off, leaving only the green leaves to take in the glaring summer sun. I hadn't 
really taken a look at the lawn yet, but the yard seemed fairly large, and there was a big camphor tree 
that cast a cool shadow over the cream-colored house. 

It took a third ring before the front door slowly opened and a middle-aged woman emerged. A huge 
woman. Now, F m not so small myself, but she must have been a good inch and a half taller than me. 
And broad at the shoulders, too. She looked like she was plenty angry at something. She was around 
fifty, I'd say. No beauty certainly, but a presentable face. Although, of course, by "presentable" I 
don't mean to suggest that hers was the most likable face. Rather thick eyebrows and a squarish jaw 
attested to a stubborn, never-go-back-on-your-word temperament. 

Through sleep-dulled eyes she gave me the most bothered look. A slightly graying shock of stiff 
frizzy hair rippled across the crown of her head; her two thick arms drooped out of the shoulders of a 
frumpy brown cotton dress. Her limbs were utterly pale. "What is it?" she said. 

"Fve come to mow the lawn," I said, taking off my sunglasses. 

"The lawn?" She twisted her neck. "You mow lawns?" 

"That's right, and since you called — " 



"Oh, I guess I did. The lawn. What's the date today?" 
"The fourteenth." 

To which she yawned, "The fourteenth, eh?" Then she yawned again. "Say, you wouldn't have a 
cigarette, would you?" 

Taking a pack of Hope regulars out of my pocket, I offered her one and lit it with a match. 
Whereupon she exhaled a long, leisurely puff of smoke up into the open air. 

"Of all the ..." she began. "What's it gonna take?" 

"Timewise?" 

She thrust out her jaw and nodded. 

"Depends on the size and how much work it needs. May I take a look?" 
"Go ahead. Seeing's how you gotta size it up first." 

There were some hydrangea bushes and that camphor tree and the rest was lawn. Two empty 
birdcages were set out beneath a window. The yard looked well tended, the grass was fairly short — 
hardly in need of mowing. I was kind of disappointed. 

"This here's still okay for another two weeks. No reasonto mow now." 

"That' s for me to decide, am I right?" 

I gave her a quick look. Well, she did have me there. 

'T want it shorter. That' s what I'mpaying you money for. Fair enough?" 

I nodded. "FH be done in four hours." 

"Awfiil slow, don't you think?" 

"I like to work slow." 

"Well, suityourself." 

I went to the van, took out the electric lawn mower, grass clippers, rake, garbage bag, my thermos 
of iced cofTee, and my transistor radio, and brought them into the yard. The sun was climbing steadily 
toward the center of the sky. The temperature was also rising steadily. Meanwhile, as I was hauling 
out my equipment, the woman had lined up ten pairs of shoes by the front door and began dusting them 
with a rag. All of them women's shoes, but of two different sizes, small and extra-large. 

"Would it be all right if I put on some music while I work?" I asked. 

The woman looked up from where she crouched. "Fine by me. I like music myself." 

Immediately I set about picking up whatever stones lay around the yard, and only then started up the 
lawn mower. Stones can really damage the blades. The mower was fitted with a plastic receptacle to 
collect all the clippings. I'd remove this receptacle whenever it got too fUll and empty the clippings 
into the garbage bag. With two thousand square feet to mow, even a short growth can amount to a lot 
of clippings. The sun kept broiling down on me. I stripped off my sweat-soaked T-shirt and kept 
working. In my shorts, I must have looked dressed down for some barbecue. I was all sweat. At this 
rate, I could have kept drinking water and drinking water and still not pissed a drop. 

After about an hour of mowing, I took a break and sat myself down under the camphor tree to drink 
some iced coffee. I could feel my entire body just drinking up the sugar. Cicadas were droning 
overhead. I turned on the radio and poked around the dial for a decent disc jockey. I stopped when I 



came to a station playing Three Dog Night's "Mama Told Me Not to Come," lay down on my back, 
and just looked up through my shades at the sun filtering between the branches. 

The woman came and planted herself by my head. Viewed frombelow, she resembled the camphor 
tree. Her right hand held a glass, and in it whiskey and ice were aswirl in the summer light. 

"Hot, eh?" she said. 

"You said it," I replied. 

"So what's a guy like you do for lunch?" 

I looked at my watch. It was 1 1 :20. 

"When noon rolls around, F 11 go get myself something to eat somewhere. I think there's a 
hamburger stand nearby." 

"No need to go out of your way. F 11 fix you a sandwich or something." 

"Really, it's all right. I always go off to get a bite." 

She raised the glass of whiskey to her mouth and downed half of it in one swallow. Then she 
pursed her lips and let out a sigh. "No bother to me. I was going to make something for myself 
anyway. C'mon, let me get you something." 

"Well, then, all right. Much obliged." 

"That's okay," she said, and trudged backinto the house, slowly swaying at the shoulders. 

I worked with the grass clippers until twelve. First, I went over the uneven spots in my mowing 
job; then, after raking up the clippings, I proceeded to trim where the mower hadn't reached. Real 
time-consuming work. If I'd wanted to do just an adequate job, I could have done only so much and no 
more; if I wanted to do it right, I could do it right. But just because I'd get down to details didn't 
necessarily mean my labors were always appreciated. Some folks would call it tedious nit-picking. 
Still, as I said before, Fm one for doing my best. It's just my nature. And even more, it's a matter of 
pride. 

A noon whistle went off somewhere, and the woman took me into the kitchen for sandwiches. The 
kitchen wasn't big, but it was clean and tidy. And except for the humming of the huge refrigerator, all 
was quiet. The plates and silverware were practically antiques. She offered me a beer, which I 
declined, seeing as I was "still on the job." So she served me some orange juice instead. She herself, 
however, had a beer. A half-empty bottle of White Horse stood prominently on the table, and the sink 
was filled with all kinds of empty bottles. 

I enjoyed the sandwich. Ham, lettuce, and cucumber, with a tang of mustard. Excellent sandwich, I 
told her. Sandwiches were the only things she was good at, she said. She didn't eat a bite, thougli — 
just nibbled at a pickle, and devoted the rest of her attention to her beer. She wasn't especially 
talkative, nor did I have anything worth bringing up. 

At twelve-thirty, I returned to the lawn. My last afternoon lawn. 

I listened to rock music on FEN while I gave one last touch-up trim, then raked the lawn repeatedly 
and checked from several angles for any overlooked places, just like barbers do. By one-thirty, I was 
two-thirds done. Time and again, sweat would get into my eyes, and I would go douse my face at the 
outdoor faucet. A couple of times I got a hard-on, then it would go away. Pretty ridiculous, getting a 
hard-on just mowing a lawn. 

I fmished working by two-twenty. I turned off the radio, took off my shoes, and walked all over the 



lawn in my bare feet: nothing left untrimmed, no uneven patches. Smooth as a carpet. 

"Even now, I still like you," she had written in her last letter. "You're kind, and one of the finest 
people I know. But somehow, that just wasn't enough. I don't know why I feel that way, I just do. It's 
a terrible thing to say, I know, and it probably won't amount to much of an explanation. Nineteen is an 
awful age to be. Maybe in a few years I' 11 be able to explain things better, but after a few years it 
probably won't matter anymore, will it?" 

I washed my face at the faucet, then loaded my equipment back into the van and changed into a new 
T-shirt. Having done that, I went to the front door of the house to announce that I'd finished. 

"How about a beer?" the woman asked. 

"Don't mind if I do," I said. What could be the harm of one beer, after all? 

Standing side by side at the edge of the yard, we surveyed the lawn, I with my beer, she with a long 
vodka tonic, no lemon. Her tali glass was the kind they give away at liquor stores. The cicadas were 
still chirping the whole while. The woman didn't look a bit drunk; only her breathing seemed a little 
unnatural, drawn slow between her teeth with a slight wheeze. 

"You do good work," she said. "Fve called in a lot of lawn-maintenance people before, but you're 
the first to do this good a job." 

"You're verykind," I said. 

"My late husband was fussy about the lawn, you know. Always did a crack job himself. Very much 
like the way you work." 

I took out my cigarettes and offered her one. As we stood there smoking, I noticed how big her 
hands were compared to mine. Big enough to dwarf both the glass in her right hand and the Hope 
regular in her left. Her fmgers were stubby — no rings — and several of the nails had strong vertical 
lines running through them. 

"Whenever my husband got any time off, he'd always be mowing the lawn. But mind you, he was 
nooddball." 

I tried to conjure up an image of the woman's husband, but I couldn't quite picture the guy. Any 
more than I could imagine a camphor-tree husband and wife. 

The woman wheezed again. "Ever since my husband passed away," she said, "Fve had to call in 
professionals. I can't stand too much sun, you know, and my daughter, she doesn't like getting tanned. 
Other than to get a tan, no real reason for a young giri to be mowing lawns anyway, right?" 

I nodded. 

"My, but I do like the way you work, though. That' s the way lawns ought to be mowed." 
I looked the lawn over one more time. The woman belched. 
"Come again next month, okay?" 
"Next month' s no good," I said. 
"How 's that?" she said. 

"This job here today's my last," I said. "If I don't get myself back on the ball with my studies, my 
grade point average is going to be in real trouble." 

The woman looked me hard in the face, then glanced at my feet, then looked back at my face. 



"A student, eh?" 
"Yeah," I said. 
"What school?" 

The name of the university made no visible impression on her. It wasn't a very impressive 
university. She just scratched behind her ear with her index fmger. 

"So you're giving up this line of work, then?" 

"Yeah, for this summer at least," I said. No more mowing lawns for me this summer. Nor next 
summer, nor the next. 

The woman filled her cheeks with vodka tonic as if she were going to gargle, then gulped down her 
precious mouthwash half a swallow at a time. Her whole forehead beaded up with sweat, like it was 
crawling with tiny bugs. 

"Come inside," the woman said. "It's too hot outdoors." 

I looked at my watch. Two thirty-five. Getting late? Still early? I couldn't make up my mind. I'd 
already finished with all my work. From tomorrow, I wouldn't have to mow another inch of grass. I 
had really mixed feelings. 

"You in a hurry?" she asked. 

I shook my head. 

"So why don't you just come in and have something cool to drink before you get on your way? 
Won't take much time. And besides, I' ve got something I want you to see." 

Something she wants me to see? 

Still, there was no hesitating, one way or another. She had already started to shuffle off ahead of 
me. She didn't even bother to look back in my direction. I had no choice but to follow her. I felt kind 
of light-headed from the heat. 

The interior of the house was just as deathly quiet as before. Ducking in from the flood of summer 
afternoon light so suddenly, I felt my eyes tingle from deep behind my pupils. Darkness — in a dim, 
somehow dilute solution — washed through the place, a darkness that seemed to have settled in 
decades ago. The air was chilly, but not with the chill of air-conditioning. It was the fluid chill of air 
in motion: Somewhere a breeze was getting in, somewhere it was leaking out. 

"This way," the woman said, traipsing off down a long, straight hallway. There were several 
windows along the passage, but the stone wali of a neighboring house and an overgrowth of zelkova 
trees still managed to block out the light. All sorts of smells drifted the length of the hallway, each 
recalling something different. Time-worn smells, built up over time, only to dissipate in time. The 
smell of old clothes and old furniture, old books, old lives. At the end of the hallway was a staircase. 
The woman turned around to make sure I was following, then headed up the stairs. The old boards 
creaked with e very step. 

At the top of the stairs, some light fmally shone into the house. The window on the landing had no 
curtain, and the summer sun pooled on the floor. There were only two rooms upstairs, one a storage 
room, the other a regular bedroom. The smoky-green door had a small frosted-glass portal. The green 
paint had begun to chip slightly, and the brass doorknob was patinaed white on the handgrip. 

The woman pursed her lips and blew out a slow stream of air, set her empty vodka-tonic glass on 
the windowsill, fished a key ring out of her dress pocket, and noisily unlocked the door. 



"Go on m," she said. We stepped into the room Inside, it was pitch-black and stuffy, flill of hot, 
still air. Only the thinnest silver-foil sheets of light sliced into the room from the cracks between the 
tightly closed shutters. I couldn't make out a thing, just flickering specks of airborne dust. The woman 
drew back the curtains, opened the windows, and slid back shutters that rattled in their tracks. 
Instantly, the room was swept with brilliant sunlight and a cool southerly breeze. 

The bedroomwas your typical teenage girl's room. Study deskby the window, small wood-framed 
bed over on the other side of the room. The bed was dressed in coral-blue sheets — not a wrinkle on 
them — and pillowcases of the same color. There was also a blanket folded at the foot of the bed. Next 
to the bed stood a wardrobe and a dresser on which were arranged a few toiletries. A hairbrush and a 
small pair of scissors, a lipstick, a compact, and whatnot. She didn't seem all that much of a makeup 
enthusiast. 

Stacked on the desk were notebooks and two dictionaries, French and English. Both looked well 
used. Literally so; not ill-treated but handled with some care. An assortment of pens and pencils were 
neatly laid out in a small tray, along with an eraser worn round on one side only. Then there was an 
alarm clock, a desk lamp, and a glass paperweight. All quite plain. On the wood-paneled wali hung 
five full-color bird pictures and a calendar with only dates. A finger run over the desktop became 
white with dust, a whole month's worth. The calendar still read June. 

Overall, though, I had to say the room was refreshingly uncluttered for a giri these days. No stuffed 
toys, no photos of rock stars. No frilly decorations or flower-print wastepaper bin. Just a built-in 
bookcase lined with anthologies, volumes of poetry, movie magazines, painting-exhibition catalogs. 
There were even some English paperbacks. I tried to form an image of the giri whose room this was, 
but the only face that came to mind was that of my ex-girlfriend. 

The woman sat her middle-aged bulk down on the bed and looked at me. She had been following 
my line of vision all along but seemed to be thinking of something entirely different. Her eyes were 
turned in my direction, all right, yet she wasn't actually seeing anything. I plunked myself down in the 
chair by the desk and gazed at the plaster wali behind the woman. Nothing hung there; it was a blank 
wali. Stare at it long enough, though, and the top began to tilt in toward me. It seemed sure to topple 
over onto her head any minute. But of course, it wouldn't; the light just made it look that way. 

"Won't you have something to drink?" she asked. I told her no. 

"Really now, don't stand on ceremony. It's not like you're going to kick yourself afterward for 
having something." 

So I said okay, I'd have the same, pointing to her vodka tonic, only watered down a bit, please. 
Five minutes later, she returned with two vodka tonics and an ashtray. I took a sip of my vodka tonic. 
It wasn't watered at all. I decided to smoke a cigarette and wait for the ice to melt. 

"You've got a healthy body," she said. "You won't get drunk." 

I nodded vaguely. My father was that way, too. Still, there hasn't been a human being yet won out in 
a match against alcohol. The only stories you hear are about people who never catch on to things until 
they've sunk past their noses. My father died when I was sixteen. A real fme-line case, his was. So 
fine I can hardly recall if he'd even been alive or not. 

The woman remained silent all this time. The only sound she made was the tinkling of ice in her 
glass each time she took a sip. Every so often a cool breeze would blow in through the open window 
from another hill across the way to the south. A tranquil summer afternoon that seemed destined to put 



me to sleep. Somewhere, far off, a phone was ringing. 

"Have a look inside the wardrobe," the woman prompted. I walked over to the wardrobe and 
opened the double doors, as I was told. The inside was absolutely packed with hangers and hangers 
of clothes. Half dresses, the other half skirts and blouses and jackets, all of them summer clothes. 
Some things looked pretty old, others as if they'd scarcely even been tried on. All the skirts were 
minis. Everything was nice enough, I suppose. The taste, the material, nothing that would catch your 
eye, but not bad. 

With this many clothes, a giri could wear a different outfit each date for an entire summer. I looked 
at the rack of clothes awhile longer, then shut the door. 

"Nice stuff," I said. 

"Have a look in the drawers," the woman said. I was hesitant, but what could I do? I gave in and 
pulled open the drawers in the bottom of the wardrobe one by one. Going into a girl's room in her 
absence and turning it inside out — even with her mother's permission — wasn't my idea of the decent 
thing to do, but it would have been equally bothersome to refuse. Far be it from me to figure out what 
goes on in the mind of someone who starts hitting the bottle at eleven in the morning. In the first big 
drawer on top were sweaters, polo shirts, and T-shirts, washed and neatly folded without a wrinkle. 
In the second drawer were handbags, belts, handkerchiefs, bracelets, plus a few fabric hats. In the 
third drawer, underwear, socks, and stockings. Everything was clean and neat. Somehow, it made me 
just a little sad, as if something were weighing down on my chest. I shut the last drawer. 

The woman was still sitting on the bed, staring out the window at the scenery. The vodka tonic in 
her right hand was almost empty. 

I returned to the chair and lit up a brand-new cigarette. The window looked out on a gentle slope 
that ran down to where another slope picked up. Greenery as far as the eye could see, hill and dale, 
with tract-house streets pasted on as an afterthought. Each house having its own yard, each yard its 
lawn. 

"What d'you think?" asked the woman, eyes still fixed on the window. "You know, about the giri 
■>•> 

"How can I say without ever having met her?" I said. 

"Most women, you look at their clothes, you know what they're like," she said. 

I thought about my girlfriend. Then I tried to remember the sort of clothes she wore. I drew a blank. 
What I could recall of her was all too vague. No sooner had I begun to see her skirt than I lost sight of 
her blouse; I'd managed to bring her hat to mind when the face changed into some other girl's. I 
couldn't remember a single thing fromjust half a year before. When it came right down to it, what had 
I known about her? 

"How can I say?" I repeated. 

"General impressions are good enough. Whatever comes to mind. Anything you' d care to say, any 
little bit at all." 

I took a sip of my vodka tonic to gain myself some time. The ice had almost all melted, making the 
tonic water taste like lemonade. The vodka still packed a punch going down, creating a warm glow in 
my stomach. A breeze burst through the window and sent white cigarette ash flying all over the desk. 

"Seems she's nice — very nice — keeps everything in order," I said. "Not too pushy, though not 



without character, either. Grades in the upper mid-range of her class. Goes to a women's college or 
junior college, doesn't have so many friends, but close ones . . . Am I on target?" 

"Keep going." 

I swirled the glass around in my hand a couple of times, then set it down on the desk. "I don't know 
what more to say. In the first place, I don't even know if what Fve said so far was anywhere close." 

"You're pretty much on target," she said blankly, "pretty much on target." 

Little by little, I was beginning to get a feel for the giri; her presence hovered over everything in the 
room like a hazy white shadow. No face, no hands, nothing. Just a barely perceptible disturbance in a 
sea of light. I took another sip of my vodka tonic. 

"She 's got a boyfriend," I continued, "or two. I don't know. I can't tell how close they are. But 
that's neither here nor there. What matters is . . . she hasn't really taken to anything. Her own body, the 
things she thinks about, what she' s looking for, what others seek in her ... the whole works." 

"Uh-huh," the woman said after a moment's pause. "I see what you're saying." 

I didn't. Oh, I knew what the words meant, but to whom were they directed? And from whose point 
of view? I was exhausted, wanted just to sleep. If only I could get some sleep, a lot of things would 
surely become clearer. Ali the same, I couldn't believe that getting things clearer would make them 
any easier. 

At that the woman fell silent for a long time. I also held my tongue. Ten, flfteen minutes like that. 
Nothing better to do with my hands, I ended up drinking half the vodka tonic. The breeze picked up a 
bit, and the round leaves of the camphor tree began to sway. 

"Sorry, I shouldn't have kept you here," the woman said sometime later. "You did such a beautiflil 
job on the lawn, I was just so pleased." 

"Thanks," I said. 

"Let me pay you," she said, thrusting her big white hand into her dress pocket. "How much is it?" 
"They' 11 be sending you a regular bill later. You can pay by bank transfer," I said. 
"Oh," said the woman. 

We went back down the same staircase, through the same hallway, out to the front door. The 
hallway and entry way were just as chilly as when we came in, chilly and dark. I felt I'd returned to 
my childhood, back in the summers when I used to wade up this shallow creek and would pass under 
a big iron bridge. It was exactly the same sensation. Darkness, and suddenly the temperature of the 
water would drop. And the pebbles would have this fiinny slime. When I got to the front door and put 
on my tennis shoes, was I ever relieved! Sunlight all around me, the leaf-scented breeze, a few bees 
buzzing sleepily about the hedge. 

"Really beautifully mowed," said the woman, once again viewing the lawn. 

I gave the lawn another look, too. A really beautiflil job, to be sure. 

The woman reached into her pocket, and started pulling out all kinds of stuff — truly all kinds of 
junk — from which she picked out a crumpled ten-thousand-yen note. The bill wasn't even that old, 
just all crumpled up. It could have passed for fourteen, fifteen years old. After a moment's hesitation, 
I decided I'd better not refuse. 

"Thank you," I said. 



The woman seemed to have still left something unsaid. As if she didn't quite know how to put it. 
She stared down at the glass in her right hand, kind of lost. The glass was empty. Then she looked 
back up at me. 

"You decide to start mowing lawns again, be sure to give me a call. Anytime at all." 
"Right," I said. "Will do. And say, thanks for the sandwich and the drink." 

The woman hemmed and hawed, then promptly turned an about-face and walked back to the front 
door. I started the engine on the van and turned on the radio. Getting on three o'clock, it was. 

I pulled into a drive-in for a little pick-me-up and ordered a Coca-Cola and spaghetti. The 
spaghetti was so utterly disgusting I could fmish only half of it. But if you really want to know, I 
wasn't hungry anyway. A sickly-looking waitress cleared the table, and I dozed off right there, seated 
on the vinyl-covered chair. The place was empty, after all, and the air-conditioning just right. It was 
only a short nap — no dreams. If anything, the nap itself seemed like a dream Although when I opened 
my eyes, the sun's rays weren't as intense as they had been. I drank another Coke, then paid the bill 
with the ten-thousand-yen note I'd just received. 

I went out to the parking lot, got in the van, put the keys on the dashboard, and smoked a cigarette. 
Loads of minuscule aches came over my weary muscles all at once. All things considered, I was worn 
out. I put aside any notion of driving and just sank into the seat. I smoked another cigarette. Everything 
seemed so far off, like looking through the wrong end of a pair of binoculars. "I'm sure you must want 
many things from me," my girlfriend had written, "but I myself just can't conceive that there's anything 
inme you' d want." 

All I wanted, it came to me, was to mow a good lawn. To give it a once-over with the lawn 
mower, rake up the clippings, and then trim it nice and even with clippers — that's all. And that, I can 
do. Because that's the way I feel it ought to be done. 

Isn 't that right? I spoke out loud. 

No answer. 

Ten minutes later, the manager of the drive-in came out and crouched by the van to inquire if 
everything was all right. 

'T felt a little faint," I said. 

"Yes, it's been a scorcher. Shall I bring you some water?" 
"Thankyou. But really, Fmfme." 

I pulled out of the parking lot and started east. On both sides of the road were different homes, 
different yards, different people all leading different lives. My hands on the wheel, I took in the whole 
passing panorama, the lawn mower rattling all the while in the compartment behind. 

Not once since then have I mowed a lawn. Someday, though, should I come to live in a house with a lawn, 
I' 11 probably be mowing again. ThatTl be a good while yet, I figure. But when that time comes, I'm 
sure to do the job just right. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



K E 



S I L E 



N C 



Soiturned to Ozawa and asked him, had he ever punched out a guy in an argument? 

"What makes you want to ask something like that?" Ozawa squinted his eyes at me. The look 
seemed out of character on him. As if there'd been a sudden flash of light only he had witnessed. A 
flare that just as quickly subsided, returning himto his normal passive expression. 

No real reason, I told him, only a passing thought. Hadn't meant anything by it, just asked out of 
curiosity. Totally uncalled-for, probably. 

I proceeded to change the subject, but Ozawa didn't exactly rally to it. He seemed to be somewhere 
else in his thoughts, holding back or wavering. I gave up trying to engage him in conversation and 
gazed instead out the window at the rows of silver jets. 

I don't know how the subject came up. We'd been killing time waiting for our plane, and he started 
talking about how he'd been going to a boxing gym ever since he was in junior high school. More than 
once, he'd been chosen to represent his university in boxing matches. Even today, at age thirty-one, he 
still went to the gym every week. 

I could hardly picture it. Here was this guy I'd done business with a lot; no way did he strike me as 
your rough-and-tumble boxer of close to twenty years. The guy was a singularly quiet fellow; he 
hardly ever spoke. Yet you couldn't ask for anyone more clear-cut in his work habits. Faultlessly 
sincere. Never pushed people too far, never talked about others behind their back, never complained. 
No matter how overworked he was, he never raised his voice or even arched his brows. In a word, 
he was the sort of guy you couldn't help but like. Warm, easygoing, a far cry from anything you could 
call aggressive. Where was the connection between this man and boxing? Why had he taken up the 
sport in the first place? So I asked that question. 

We were drinking coffee in the airport restaurant, waiting for our flight to Niigata. This was the 
beginning of November; the sky was heavy with clouds. Niigata was snowed in, and planes were 
running late. The airport was full of people milling about, looking more depressed with each 
announcement of flight delays. In the restaurant, the heat was too high, and I kept having to wipe off 
the sweat with my handkerchief. 

"Basically, no," Ozawa suddenly spoke up after a lengthy silence. "From the time I started boxing, 
I never hit anyone. They pound that into you from the moment you start boxing. Anyone who boxes 
must absolutely never, without gloves, hit anyone outside the ring. An ordinary person could get into 
trouble if he hit someone and landed a punch in the wrong place. But if a boxer did it, it'd be 
intentional assault with a deadly weapon." 

I nodded. 

"To be honest, I did hit someone. Once," Ozawa said. 'T was in eighth grade. It was right around 
the time I was starting to learn how to box. No excuse, but this was before I learned a single boxing 
technique. I was still on the basic bodybuilding menu. Jumping rope and stretching and running, stuff 
like that. And the thing is, I didn't even mean to throw the punch. I just got mad, and my hand flew out 
ahead of me. I couldn't stop it. And before I knew it, I'd decked him. I hit the guy, and still my whole 
body was trembling with rage." 

Ozawa had taken up boxing because his uncle ran a boxing gym. This wasn't just the local sweat 
roorrr, this was a major establishment that had launched a two-time East Asia welterweight champion. 
In fact, it'd been Ozawa's parents who suggested he go to the gym to begin with. They were worried 
about their son, the bookworm, always holed up in his room. At first, the boy wasn't keen on the idea, 



but he liked his uncle well enough, and, he told himself, if he didn't like the sport, he could always 
quit. So all very casually, he got in the habit of commuting regularly to his uncle 's gym, an hour away 
by train. 

After the first few months, Ozawa's interest in boxing surprised even himself. The biggest reason 
was that, fundamentally, boxing is a loner's sport, an extremely solitary pursuit. It was something of a 
discovery for him, a new world. And that world excited him The sweat flying off the bodies of the 
older men, the hard, squeaky feel of the gloves, the intense concentration of men with their muscles 
tuned to lightning-fast efficiency — little by little, it all took hold of his imagination. Spending 
Saturdays and Sundays at the gymbecame one of his few indulgences. 

"One of the things I like about boxing is the depth. That's what grabbed me. Compared to that, 
hitting and getting hit is no big deal. That's only the outcome. The same with winning or losing. If you 
could get to the bottom of the depth, losing doesn't matter — nothing can hurt you. And anyway, nobody 
can win at everything; somebody's got to lose. The important thing is to get deep down into it. That — 
at least to me — is boxing. When F m in a match, I feel like I' m at the bottom of a deep, deep hole. So 
far inside I can't see anyone else and no one can see me. Way down there in the darkness, doing 
battle. All alone. But not sad alone," said Ozawa. "There's all different kinds of loneliness. There's 
the tragic loneliness that tears at your nerves with pain. And then there's the loneliness that isn't like 
that at all — though in order to reach that point, you've got to pare your body down. If you make the 
effort, you get back what you put in. That' s what I learned from boxing." 

Ozawa paused a moment. 

"Actually, I'd just as soon not talk about it," he said. 'T even wish I could wipe the story out of my 
mind entirely. But of course, you never can. Why is it you can't forget what you really want to 
forget?" Ozawa broke into a smile. Then he glanced at his watch. We still had plenty of time. He 
began his deliberation. 

The guy Ozawa hit was a classmate. Aoki was his name. Ozawa hated the guy from the very 
beginning. Why, he couldn't really say. All he knew was that he hated his guts from the moment he set 
eyes on him. It was the first time in his life he despised anyone. 

"But it does happen, right?" he said. "Maybe once, but everyone has that experience. You loathe 
someone for no reason whatsoever. I' m not the type to have blind hate, but I swear there are people 
who just set you off. It's not a rational thing. But the problem is, in most cases, the other guy feels the 
same way toward you. 

"This kid Aoki was a model student. He got good grades, sat at the head of the class, teacher's pet, 
all that. And he was pretty popular, too. Granted, we were an all-boys' school, but everyone liked 
him. Everyone except me. I couldn't stand him. I couldn't stand his smarts, his calculating ways. 
Okay, if you asked me what exactly bugged me about him I wouldn't be able to say. The only thing I 
can tell you is that I knew what he was all about. And his pride, that headstrong stink of ego he gave 
off, I couldn't stand it. Purely physiological, like how someone 's body odor will turn you off. But 
Aoki was a clever guy and knew how to cover his scent. So most of the kids in the class thought he 
was clean and kind and considerate. Every time I heard how great people thought he was — of course, 
I wasn't about to go against everyone — it burned me up. 

"In almost every way, Aoki and I were polar opposites. I was a quiet kid and didn't stand out in 
class. I was happy to be left alone. Sure, I had friends, but no real friends for life. In a sense, maybe I 
was too mature too soon. Instead of hanging around with my classmates, I kept to myself. I read books 



or listened to my father's classical records or went to the gym to hear the older guys talk. I wasn't 
much to look at. My grades weren't so bad, but they weren't so hot. Teachers would forget my name. 
So, you know, I was the type you never got to know. That's how I was, never quite surfacing. I never 
told anybody about the boxing gym or books or records. 

"With Aoki, though, whatever the guy did he was like a white swan in a sea of mud. The star of the 
class, his opinions valued, always on top of things. Even I had to admit that. He was amazingly quick- 
witted. He could pick up on what others were thinking, and he could redirect his responses to match 
in no time whatsoever. He had a well-tuned head on his shoulders. No wonder everyone was 
impressed with Aoki. Everyone but me. 

"I figure Aoki had to be aware of what I thought of him. He wasn't dumb. I could tell he wasn't too 
crazy about me. After all, I wasn't stupid, either. I mean, I read more than anybody else. But you 
know, when you're young you gotta show it, so F m sure I came off stuck-up, even condescending. 
Plus, the way I kept to myself probably didn't help. 

"Then once, at the end of the term, I got the highest marks on an English exam It was a first for me, 
scoring the highest. But it wasn't an accident. There was something I really wanted — I can't even 
remember what it was anymore — and I made this deal with my folks that if I got the best grade in the 
class they' d buy it for me. So of course I studied like mad. I studied anything that could possibly be 
covered in the exam. If I had a spare moment, I went over verb conjugations. I practically memorized 
the whole textbook. So when I aced the test, it was no surprise. It was even predictable. 

"But everyone else was caught off guard. The teacher, too. And Aoki, I mean, he was shocked. He 
had always been the best student in English. The teacher even kidded Aoki about it when he 
announced the test grades. Aoki turned red. Probably thought people were laughing at him 

"A few days later, someone told me Aoki was spreading a rumor about me. That I'd cheated on the 
exam, how else could I have scored so high? When I heard that, I got really pissed off. What I should 
have done was laugh and let it go. But a junior-high-school kid doesn't have that kind of cool. 

"One noon recess, I confronted Aoki. I said I wanted to talk to him alone, away from everybody 
else. I said I'd heard this rumor, and what was the meaning of it? But Aoki could only show his 
contempt. Like, why was I getting all bent out of shape? Like, if by some fluke I happened to get the 
best score, why was I being so defensive, and what right did I have to act so uppity, anyway? After 
all, everyone knew what really happened, right? Then he tried to brush me aside, probably thinking 
that since he was in good shape and taller than me he had to be stronger, too. That's when I hauled off 
and punched the jerk in the face. It was pure reflex action. I didn't realize I'd slugged him square on 
the left cheek until a second later when Aoki fell back sideways and hit his head on a wali. With a 
hard conk. Blood was running out of his nose and onto his white shirt. He lay there, dazed, not 
knowing what had happened. 

"On my part, I regretted hitting him the instant my fist connected with his cheekbone. I shouldn't 
have done it. I felt miserable. It was a totally useless thing to have done. Like I said, my body was 
still trembling with rage, but I knew I'd done something stupid. 

"I considered apologizing to Aoki. But I didn't. If it had been anybody else but Aoki, I probably 
would have apologized. I simply couldn't bring myself to apologize to the creep. I was sorry I hit 
Aoki, but not sorry enough to say I was sorry. I didn't feel one iota of remorse toward the guy. Jerks 
like him deserved to get punched out. He was a worm, and worms get stepped on. Still, / shouldn 't 
have hit him. A truth I knew deep down, only too late. I'd already slugged him. I left Aoki there and 



walked off. 

"That afternoon, Aoki didn't show up in class. Probably went straight home, I thought. But for the 
rest of the day, a horrible feeling ate at me. It didn't give me a moment's rest. I couldn't listen to 
music, couldn't read, I couldn't enjoy a thing. I felt this murky substance coagulating in my gut, and it 
wouldn't let me concentrate. It was like I'd swallowed something slimy. I lay in bed staring at my fist. 
And it dawned on me, how lonely I was. I hated Aoki even more for making me realize this. 

"From the next day on, Aoki ignored me. He acted like I didn't exist. He went on scoring the 
highest on exams. Me, I never again poured my heart and soul into studying for a test. I couldn't 
imagine what difference it would make. The idea of competing seriously with anyone bored me. I did 
enough schoolwork to keep my head above water and did what I wanted to the rest of the time. I kept 
on going to my uncle's gym. I was getting heavy into my training. For a junior-high student, I was 
beginning to show results. I could feel my body changing. Shoulders broadening, chest thickening. My 
arms got firm, my cheeks taut. I thought, This is what it's like to become an adult. I felt great. Every 
night, I stood naked in front of the big mirror in the bathroom, I was so fascinated with my body. 

"The following school year, Aoki and I were in different classes. I was glad not to have to see him 
every day, and F m sure the feeling was mutual. So I thought the whole affair would fade away like 
some bad memory. But it wasn't so simple. Seems Aoki was lying in wait to get his revenge. Waiting 
for the right moment to cut everything out fromunder me. The bastard was flill of spite. 

"Aoki and I advanced together grade by grade. It was the same private junior high and senior high, 
but every year we were in different classes. Until the very last year — boy, did it feel ugly when we 
came face-to-face in that classroom The way he looked at me, it pried open my gut. I could feel that 
same slime come oozing out again." 

Ozawa pursed his lips and stared down at his coffee cup. Then he glanced up at me with a slight 
smile. Fromoutside the plate-glass windows came the roar of jet engines. A 737 shot straight off like 
a wedge into the clouds and vanished from sight. 

"The first semester passed pretty uneventfully Aoki hadn't changed a bit since the eighth grade. 
Some people don't grow, and they don't degenerate; they keep on exactly as they always were. Aoki 
was still at the top of the class; he was still Mr. Popular. Though to me, he was still a disgusting 
creep. We did our best not to look at each other. Let me tell you, it's no fun having your own personal 
demon in the same classroom. But it couldn't be helped. Half the blame was mine, anyway. 

"Then summer vacation came around. My last summer vacation as a high-school student. My grades 
were okay, okay enough to get me into an average university, so I didn't really eram for the entrance 
exams. My folks didn't raise a fuss, so I just studied as I always did. Saturdays and Sundays, I went to 
the gym. The rest of the time I read and listened to records. 

"Meanwhile, everyone else was going bug-eyed. Our whole school, junior high up through senior 
high, was a typical eram faetory. Who got into what university, what ranking by how many 
matriculations into where — the teachers couldn't talk about anything else. The same with the students. 
By senior year, everyone was hot under the collar, and the atmosphere in class was tense. It stank. I 
didn't like it when I first started school there, and I didn't like it six years later. Plus, to the very end, 
I didn't make one honest friend. If I hadn't taken up boxing, if I hadn't gone to my uncle's gym, I 
would have been pretty damn lonely. 

"Anyway, during summer vacation a terrible thing happened. One of my classmates, a kid named 
Matsumoto, committed suicide. He wasn't a particularly outstanding student. To be frank, he made 



almost no impression at all. When I heard that he died, I could hardly remember what he looked like. 
He'd been in my class, but I doubt if we ever talked more than two or three times. Kind of gangly, 
poor complexion — that's about all I could say about him Matsumoto died a little before August 
fifteenth, I remember, because his funeral was on Armistice Day. It was a real scorcher. There was 
this phone call saying that the boy had died and that everyone had to attend the funeral. The whole 
class. Matsumoto had leapt in front of a subway, for unknown reasons. He left a suicide note, but all it 
said was that he didn't want to go to school anymore. Nothing else. At least, that's how the story 
went. 

"Naturally, this suicide had the whole school administration scrambling. After the funeral, the 
seniors were called back to the school and lectured by the headmaster about how we were supposed 
to mourn Matsumoto's death, how we all had to bear the weight of his death, how we had to work 
extra hard to overcome our grief. The usual stock sentiments. Then we were asked if we knew 
anything about the reason Matsumoto committed suicide; if we did, we had to come right out and set 
the record straight. Nobody said a word. 

'T felt sorry for my dead classmate, but somehow it seemed pretty absurd. I mean, did he have to 
jump? If you don't like school, don't go to school. It was only half a year before you wouldn't have to 
go to that miserable school, anyway. Why kill yourself? It didn't make sense. The guy was probably 
neurotic, I figured, driven to the brink by all this cramming for entrance exams day and night. Not so 
surprising, if you think about it. One nut's bound to crack. 

"After summer vacation ended and school started up again, I noticed something strange in the air. 
My classmates seemed to be keeping their distance. I'd ask somebody about something and only get 
these cold, curt replies. At first I thought it was nerves, since everyone was on edge, right? I didn't 
think too much about it. But then five days later, out of nowhere, I was told to report to the 
headmaster. Was it true, he asked me, that I was training at a boxing gym? Yes, I was, but I wasn't 
breaking any school rules doing it. How long had I been going there? Since the eighth grade. Was it 
true I struck Aoki with a clenched fist in junior high school? Yes, it was; I wasn't about to lie. And 
was that before or after I took up boxing? After, but it was before I was even allowed to put on the 
gloves, I explained. The headmaster wasn't listening. Very well, he cleared his throat, had I ever hit 
Matsumoto? I was stunned. I mean, like I was saying, I hardly ever spoke to this Matsumoto — why 
would I have hit him? Which is what I told the headmaster. 

"Matsumoto was always getting beaten up at school, the headmaster informed me. He often went 
home covered with bruises. His mother complained that someone at school, at this school, was 
rolling him for his pocket money. But Matsumoto never gave his mother any names. He probably 
thought he'd get beaten up worse if he squealed. And with all this bearing on him, the boy committed 
suicide. Pitiful, didn't I think, he couldn't turn to anyone. He'd been worked over pretty badly So the 
school was looking into the situation. If there was anything I had on my mind, I was to own up. In 
which case, matters would be settled quietly. If not, the police would take over the investigation. Did 
I understand? 

"Immediately, I knew Aoki was behind this. It was his touch, this using something like Matsumoto's 
death to his own advantage. I bet he didn't even lie. He didn't need to. He found out that I went to a 
boxing gym — who knows how? — then when he heard about someone beating up on Matsumoto, the 
rest was easy Just put one and one together. Report how I went to a gym and how I'd hit him. It didn't 
take much more. Oh, I' m sure he added in a few trimmings, like, say, how he was scared of me, so he 
never told anyone about this before, or how I really bled him. Nothing that could easily be exposed as 



a lie. He was carefiil that way. Coloring plain facts just enough, shaping this undeniable atmosphere 
of implication. It was a skill he practiced. 

"The headmaster glared at me: guilty as charged. For him, anyone who went to a boxing gym was 
already suspected of delinquency. Nor was I exactly the type of student teachers took to. Three days 
later, the police called me in for questioning. Needless to say, I was in shock. 

"They put me through a simple police interrogation. I said how I'd hardly ever spoken to 
Matsumoto. It was true that I had hit a fellow student named Aoki three years before, but that was a 
perfectly ordinary, stupid argument, and I hadn't caused any trouble since. That was it. There is a 
rumor that you were hitting this Matsumoto, said the officer on duty. That's all it is, I told him, a 
rumor. Someone who has it in for me is spreading it around. There is no truth, no proof, no case. 

"Word got around school that the police had questioned me. And the atmosphere in class grew even 
colder. A police summons was like a verdict — like, they didn't haul people in for no reason, right? 
Everyone believed I'd been beating up on Matsumoto. I don't know what nonsense Aoki was 
peddling, but everyone bought it. I didn't even want to know what the story was; I knew it was dirt. 
No one in the entire school would speak to me. As if by consensus — it had to be — I got the silent 
treatment. Even urgent requests from me got a deaf ear. I was avoided like the plague. My existence 
was wiped from their field of vision. 

"Even the teachers did their best not to look in my direction. They' d say my name when they took 
roli, but they never called on me in class. Phys. Ed. was the worst. When the class split into teams, I 
wouldn't end up on either side. No one would pair up with me, and the gym teacher would pretend it 
wasn't happening. I went to school in silence, attended classes in silence, went home in silence. Day 
after day, a vacuum. After two or three weeks of this, I lost my appetite. I lost weight. I couldn't sleep 
at night. I'd lie there, all worked up, my head filled with this endless succession of ugly images. And 
when I was awake, my mind was in a fog. I wasn't sure if I was awake or asleep. 

"I even laid off boxing practice. My folks got worried and asked me what was wrong. What was I 
supposed to say? Nothing, F m just tired. What good would it do to tell them? After school I hid out in 
my room There was nothing else for me to do. I'd see these things play out on the ceiling. I imagined 
all kinds of scenarios. Most often, I saw myself punching Aoki out. I'd catch him alone and I'd 
pummel him, over and over again. I'd tell him what I thought of him — a piece of trasli — and I'd knock 
the crap out of him. He could scream and cry all he wanted — forgive me, forgive me — but I'd just 
keep hitting him, beating his face to a pulp. Only after a while, punching away, I'd start to get sick. It 
was fine at first, it was great, it served the bastard right. Then, slowly, this nausea would creep up in 
me. But I still wouldn't be able to stop beating Aoki up. I'd look up at the ceiling and Aoki's face 
would be there and I'd be hitting him. And I wouldn't be able to stop. Before long, he was a bloody 
mess and I felt like puking. 

'T thought about getting up in front of everyone and declaring outright that I was innocent, that I 
hadn't done anything. But who was going to believe me? And why was it up to me to apologize to that 
bunch of turkeys who 'd maw down anything Aoki said to begin with? 

"So I was stuck. I couldn't give Aoki the beating he had coming, and I couldn't explain myself. I 
had to put up and shut up. It was only another half year. After this semester, school would be finished 
and I wouldn't have to answer to anyone. One half year more, sparring with the silence. But could I 
hold out that long? I doubted I could go one month. At home, I ticked off each day on my calendar — 
one more day down, one more day down. I was getting crushed. Thinking back on it now, I can't 



believe how close I got to the danger zone. 

"My first hint of a reprieve came a month later. By accident, on my way to school, I found myself 
face-to-face with Aoki on the train. As usual, it was so packed you couldn't move. And there was 
Aoki, two or three people away, over someone's shoulder, facing me. I must have looked terrible, 
short on sleep, a neurotic wreck. At first, he gave me this smirk. Like, so how's it going now, eh? 
Aoki had to know that I knew that he was behind everything. Our eyes locked. We glared at each 
other. But as I was staring the guy in the eye, a strange emotion came over me. Sure, I was furious at 
Aoki. I hated the guy; I wanted to kill him. But suddenly, at the same time, there in the train, I felt 
something like pity. I mean, was this really the best this joker could do? Was this all it took to give 
him such airs of superiority? Could he actually be so satisfied, so happy with himself, for this? It was 
pathetic. I was practically moved to grief. To think that this fool would be eternally incapable of 
knowing true happiness, true pride. That there existed creatures so lacking in human depth. Not that 
F m such a deep guy, but at least I know a real human being when I see one. But his kind, no. His life 
was as flat as a piece of slate. It was all surface, no matter what he did. He was nothing. 

'T kept looking him in the face as these emotions went through me, and I didn't feel like punching 
him out anymore. I couldn't have cared less about him. Honest, I was surprised how little I cared. 
And then I knew I could put up with another five months of the silence. I still had my pride. I wasn't 
going to let some slime like Aoki drag me down with him. 

"That was the look I gave Aoki. He must have thought it was a stare-down, which he wasn't about 
to lose, and when the train reached the station we didn't break our gaze. But in the end, it was Aoki 
who wavered. Just the slightest tremble of his pupils, but I picked up on it. Right away. The look of a 
boxer whose legs are giving out on him. He's working them, only they're not moving. And the stiff 
doesn't get it; he thinks they're still pacing. But his legs are dead. They've died in their tracks and 
now his shoulders won't dance. Which means the power's gone out of his punch. It was that look. 
Something' s wrong, but he can't tell what. 

"After that, I was home free. I slept soundly, ate square meals, went to the gym. I wasn't going to be 
defeated. It wasn't like I had triumphed over Aoki, either. It was a matter of my not losing out on life. 
It's too easy to let yourself get ground down by those who give you shit. So I held out for five more 
months. No one said word one to me. F m not wrong, I kept telling myself, everybody else is. I held 
my chest up every day I went to school. And after graduating, I went to a university in Kyushu. Far 
from any of that high-school lot." 

At that, Ozawa let out a big sigh. Then he asked if I wanted another cup of coffee. No thanks, I said, 
I'd already had three. 

"People who go through a heavy experience like that are changed men, like it or not," he said. 
"They change for the better and they change for the worse. On the good side, they become unshakable. 
Next to that half year, the rest of the suffering Fve experienced doesn't even count. I can put up with 
almost anything. And I also am a lot more sensitive to the pain of people around me. That's on the 
plus side. It made me capable of making some real friends. But there's also the minus side. I mean, 
it's impossible, in my own mind, to believe in people. I don't hate people, and I haven't lost my faith 
in humanity. Fve got a wife and kids. We've made a home and we protect each other. Those things 
you can't do without trust. It's just that, sure, we're living a good life right now, but if something were 
to happen, if something really were to come along and yank up everything by the roots, even 
surrounded by a happy family and good friends, I don't know what I'd do. What would happen if one 



day, for no reason, no one believes a word you say? It happens, you know. Suddenly, one day, out of 
the blue. F m always thinking about it. Last time, it was only six months, but the next time? No one can 
say; there's no guarantee. I don't have confidence in how long I can hold out the next time. When I 
think of these things, I really get shaken up. F 11 dream about it and wake up in the middle of the night. 
It happens a little too often, in fact. And when it happens, I wake my wife up and I hold on to her and 
cry. Sometimes for a whole hour, Fm so scared." 

He broke off and looked out the window to the clouds. They'd barely moved. A heavy lid, bearing 
down from the heavens. Absorbing all color from the control tower and airplanes and ground- 
transport vehicles and tarmac and men in uniform. 

"People like Aoki don't scare me. They're all over the place, but I don't trouble myself with them 
anymore. When I run into them, I don't get involved. I see them coming and I head the other way. I can 
spot them in an instant. But at the same time, Fve got to admire the Aokis of this world. Their ability 
to lay low until the right moment, their knack for latching on to opportunities, their skill in fiicking 
with people 's minds — that's no ordinary talent. I hate their kind so much it makes me want to puke, 
but it is a talent. 

"No, what really scares me is how easily, how uncritically, people will believe the crap that slime 
like Aoki deal out. How these Aoki types produce nothing themselves, don't have an idea in the 
world, and talk so nice, how this slime can sway gullible types to any opinion and get them to perform 
on cue, as a group. And this group never entertains even a sliver of doubt that they could be wrong. 
They think nothing of hurting someone, senselessly, permanently. They don't take any responsibility 
for their actions. Them. They 're the real monsters. They 're the ones I have nightmares about. In those 
dreams, there's only the silence. And these faceless people. Their silence seeps into everything like 
ice water. And then it all goes murky. And Fm dissolving and Fm screaming, but no one hears." 

Ozawajust shookhis head. 

I waited for him to continue, but he was quiet. He folded his hands and lay them on the table. 
"We still have time — how about a beer?" he said after a while. 
Yeah, let's, I said. We probably both could use one. 



— translated by Alfred Birnbaum 



The 

EL E P H A N T 

V A N I S HEs 



WhEN THE ELEPHANT disappeared from our town's elephant house, I read about it in the newspaper. My alarm 
clock woke me that day, as always, at 6: 13. 1 went to the kitchen, made coffee and toast, turned on the 
radio, spread the paper out on the kitchen table, and proceeded to munch and read. F m one of those 
people who read the paper from beginning to end, in order, so it took me awhile to get to the article 
about the vanishing elephant. The front page was filled with stories of SDI and the trade friction with 
America, after which I plowed through the national news, international politics, economics, letters to 
the editor, bookreviews, real-estate ads, sports reports, and fmally, the regional news. 

The elephant article was the lead story in the regional section. The unusually large headline caught 

my eye ! ELEPHANT missing IN TOKYO suburb, and, beneath that, in type one size smaller, C ITIZENS' FeARS IVloUNT. SoME CaLL FOR 

Probe. There was a photo of policemen inspecting the empty elephant house. Without the elephant, 
something about the place seemed wrong. It looked bigger than it needed to be, blank and empty like 
some huge, dehydrated beast from which the innards had been plucked. 

Brushing away my toast crumbs, I studied every line of the article. The elephant's absence had first 
been noticed at two o 'clock on the afternoon of May 18 — the day before — when men from the school- 
lunch company delivered their usual truckload of food (the elephant mostly ate leftovers from the 
lunches of children in the local elementary school). On the ground, still locked, lay the steel shackle 
that had been fastened to the elephant's hind leg, as though the elephant had slipped out of it. Nor was 
the elephant the only one missing. Also gone was its keeper, the man who had been in charge of the 
elephant's care and feeding from the start. 

According to the article, the elephant and keeper had last been seen sometime after five o 'clock the 
previous day (May 17) by a few pupils from the elementary school, who were visiting the elephant 
house, making crayon sketches. These pupils must have been the last to see the elephant, said the 
paper, since the keeper always closed the gate to the elephant enclosure when the six-o' clock siren 
blew. 

There had been nothing unusual about either the elephant or its keeper at the time, according to the 
unanimous testimony of the pupils. The elephant had been standing where it always stood, in the 
middle of the enclosure, occasionally wagging its trunk from side to side or squinting its wrinkly 
eyes. It was such an awfully old elephant that its every move seemed a tremendous effort — so much 
so that people seeing it for the first time feared it might collapse at any moment and draw its final 
breath. 

The elephant's age had led to its adoption by our town a year earlier. When fmancial problems 
caused the little private zoo on the edge of town to close its doors, a wildlife dealer found places for 
the other animals in zoos throughout the country. But all the zoos had plenty of elephants, apparently, 
and not one of them was willing to take in a feeble old thing that looked as if it might die of a heart 
attack at any moment. And so, after its companions were gone, the elephant stayed alone in the 
decaying zoo for nearly four months with nothing to do — not that it had had anything to do before. 

This caused a lot of difficulty, both for the zoo and for the town. The zoo had sold its land to a 
developer, who was planning to put up a high-rise condo building, and the town had already issued 
him a permit. The longer the elephant problem remained unresolved, the more interest the developer 
had to pay for nothing. Still, simply killing the thing would have been out of the question. If it had 
been a spider monkey or a bat, they might have been able to get away with it, but the killing of an 
elephant would have been too hard to cover up, and if it ever came out afterward, the repercussions 
would have been tremendous. And so the various parties had met to deliberate on the matter, and they 



formulated an agreement on the disposition of the old elephant: 

1 . The town would take ownership of the elephant at no cost. 

2. The developer would, without compensation, provide land for housing the elephant. 

3. The zoo's former owners would be responsible for paying the keeper's wages. 

I had had my own private interest in the elephant problem from the very outset, and I kept a 
scrapbook with every clipping I could fmd on it. I had even gone to hear the town council's debates 
on the matter, which is why I am able to give such a fUll and accurate account of the course of events. 
And while my account may prove somewhat lengthy, I have chosen to set it down here in case the 
handling of the elephant problem should bear directly upon the elephant' s disappearance. 

When the mayor fmished negotiating the agreement — with its provision that the town would take 
charge of the elephant — a movement opposing the measure boiled up from within the ranks of the 
opposition party (whose very existence I had never imagined until then). "Why must the town take 
ownership of the elephant?" they demanded of the mayor, and they raised the following points (sorry 
for all these lists, but I use themto make things easier to understand): 

1 . The elephant problem was a question for private enterprise — the zoo and the developer; there 
was no reason for the town to become involved. 

2. Care and feeding costs would be too high. 

3. What did the mayor intend to do about the security problem? 

4. What merit would there be in the town' s having its own elephant? 

"The town has any number of responsibilities it should be taking care of before it gets into the 
business of keeping an elephant — sewer repair, the purchase of a new fire engine, etcetera," the 
opposition group declared, and while they did not say it in so many words, they hinted at the 
possibility of some secret deal between the mayor and the developer. 

In response, the mayor had this to say: 

1. If the town permitted the construction of high-rise condos, its tax revenues would increase so 
dramatically that the cost of keeping an elephant would be insignificant by comparison; thus it made 
sense for the town to take on the care of this elephant. 

2. The elephant was so old that it neither ate very much nor was likely to pose a danger to anyone. 

3. When the elephant died, the town would take full possession of the land donated by the 
developer. 

4. The elephant could become the town' s symbol. 

The long debate reached the conclusion that the town would take charge of the elephant after all. As 
an old, well-established residential suburb, the town boasted a relatively affluent citizenry, and its 
fmancial footing was sound. The adoption of a homeless elephant was a move that people could look 
upon favorably. People like old elephants better than sewers and fire engines. 

I myself was all in favor of having the town care for the elephant. True, I was getting sick of high- 
rise condos, but I liked the idea of my town' s owning an elephant. 

A wooded area was cleared, and the elementary school's aging gym was moved there as an 
elephant house. The man who had served as the elephant's keeper for many years would come to live 
in the house with the elephant. The children's lunch scraps would serve as the elephant's feed. 



Finally, the elephant itself was carted in a trailer to its new home, there to live out its remaining 
years. 

I joined the crowd at the elephant- house dedication ceremonies. Standing before the elephant, the 
mayor delivered a speech (on the town's development and the enrichment of its cultural facilities); 
one elementary-school pupil, representing the student body, stood up to read a composition ("Please 
live a long and healthy life, Mr. Elephant"); there was a sketch contest (sketching the elephant 
thereafter became an integral component of the pupils' artistic education); and each of two young 
women in swaying dresses (neither of whom was especially good-looking) fed the elephant a bunch 
of bananas. The elephant endured these virtually meaningless (for the elephant, entirely meaningless) 
formalities with hardly a twitch, and it chomped on the bananas with a vacant stare. When it finished 
eating the bananas, everyone applauded. 

On its right rear leg, the elephant wore a solid, heavy-looking steel cuff from which there stretched 
a thick chain perhaps thirty feet long, and this in turn was securely fastened to a concrete slab. Anyone 
could see what a sturdy anchor held the beast in place: The elephant could have struggled with all its 
might for a hundred years and never broken the thing. 

I couldn't tell if the elephant was bothered by its shackle. On the surface, at least, it seemed all but 
unconscious of the enormous chunk of metal wrapped around its leg. It kept its blank gaze fixed on 
some indeterminate point in space, its ears and a few white hairs on its body waving gently in the 
breeze. 

The elephant's keeper was a small, bony old man. It was hard to guess his age; he could have been 
in his early sixties or late seventies. He was one of those people whose appearance is no longer 
influenced by their age after they pass a certain point in life. His skin had the same darkly ruddy, 
sunburned look both summer and winter, his hair was stiff and short, his eyes were small. His face 
had no distinguishing characteristics, but his almost perfectly circular ears stuck out on either side 
with disturbing prominence. 

He was not an unfriendly man. If someone spoke to him, he would reply, and he expressed himself 
clearly If he wanted to he could be almost charming — though you always knew he was somewhat ill 
at ease. Generally, he remained a reticent, lonely-looking old man. He seemed to like the children 
who visited the elephant house, and he worked at being nice to them, but the children never really 
warmed to him. 

The only one who did that was the elephant. The keeper lived in a small prefab room attached to 
the elephant house, and all day long he stayed with the elephant, attending to its needs. They had been 
together for more than ten years, and you could sense their closeness in every gesture and look. 
Whenever the elephant was standing there blankly and the keeper wanted it to move, all he had to do 
was stand next to the elephant, tap it on a front leg, and whisper something in its ear. Then, swaying 
its huge bulk, the elephant would go exactly where the keeper had indicated, take up its new position, 
and continue staring at a point in space. 

On weekends, I would drop by the elephant house and study these operations, but I could never 
figure out the principle on which the keeper-elephant communication was based. Maybe the elephant 
understood a few simple words (it had certainly been living long enough), or perhaps it received its 
information through variations in the taps on its leg. Or possibly it had some special power 
resembling mental telepathy and could read the keeper 's mind. I once asked the keeper how he gave 
his orders to the elephant, but the old man just smiled and said, "We've been together a long time." 



And soayear went by. Then, without warning, the elephant vanished. One day it was there, and the next it 
had ceased to be. 

I poured myself a second cup of coffee and read the story again from beginning to end. Actually, it 
was a pretty strange article — the kind that might excite Sherlock Holmes. "Look at this, Watson," he'd 
say, tapping his pipe. "A very interesting article. Very interesting indeed." 

What gave the article its air of strangeness was the obvious confusion and bewilderment of the 
reporter. And this confusion and bewilderment clearly came from the absurdity of the situation itself. 
You could see how the reporter had struggled to fmd clever ways around the absurdity in order to 
write a "normal" article. But the struggle had only driven his confusion and bewilderment to a 
hopeless extreme. 

For example, the article used such expressions as "the elephant escaped," but if you looked at the 
entire piece it became obvious that the elephant had in no way "escaped." It had vanished into thin 
air. The reporter revealed his own conflicted state of mind by saying that a few "details" remained 
"unclear," but this was not a phenomenon that could be disposed of by using such ordinary 
terminology as "details" or "unclear," I felt. 

First, there was the problem of the steel cuff that had been fastened to the elephant's leg. This had 
been found still locked. The most reasonable explanation for this would be that the keeper had 
unlocked the ring, removed it from the elephant's leg, locked the ring again, and run off with the 
elephant — a hypothesis to which the paper clung with desperate tenacity despite the fact that the 
keeper had no key! Only two keys existed, and they, for security's sake, were kept in locked safes, 
one in police headquarters and the other in the flrehouse, both beyond the reach of the keeper — or of 
anyone else who might attempt to steal them. And even if someone had succeeded in stealing a key, 
there was no need whatever for that person to make a point of returning the key after using it. Yet the 
following morning both keys were found in their respective safes at the police and fire stations. 
Which brings us to the conclusion that the elephant pulled its leg out of that solid steel ring without the 
aid of a key — an absolute impossibility unless someone had sawed the foot off. 

The second problem was the route of escape. The elephant house and grounds were surrounded by 
a massive fence nearly ten feet high. The question of security had been hotly debated in the town 
council, and the town had settled upon a system that might be considered somewhat excessive for 
keeping one old elephant. Heavy iron bars had been anchored in a thick concrete foundation (the cost 
of the fence was borne by the real-estate company), and there was only a single entrance, which was 
found locked from the inside. There was no way the elephant could have escaped from this 
fortresslike enclosure. 

The third problem was elephant tracks. Directly behind the elephant enclosure was a steep hill, 
which the animal could not possibly have climbed, so even if we suppose that the elephant had 
somehow managed to puli its leg out of the steel ring and leap over the ten-foot-high fence, it would 
still have had to escape down the path to the front of the enclosure, and there was not a single mark 
anywhere in the soft earth of that path that could be seen as an elephant's footprint. 

Riddled as it was with such perplexities and labored circumlocutions, the newspaper article as a 
whole left but one possible conclusion: The elephant had not escaped. It had vanished. 

Needless to say, however, neither the newspaper nor the police nor the mayor was willing to admit 
— openly, at least — that the elephant had vanished. The police were continuing to investigate, their 
spokesman saying only that the elephant either "was taken or was allowed to escape in a clever, 



deliberately calculated move. Because of the difficulty involved in hiding an elephant, it is only a 
matter of time till we solve the case." To this optimistic assessment he added that they were planning 
to search the woods in the area with the aid of local hunters' clubs and sharpshooters from the 
national Self-Defense Force. 

The mayor had held a news conference, in which he apologized for the inadequacy of the town's 
police resources. At the same time, he declared, "Our elephant-security system is in no way inferior 
to similar facilities in any zoo in the country. Indeed, it is far stronger and far more fail-safe than the 
Standard cage." He also observed, "This is a dangerous and senseless antisocial act of the most 
malicious kind, and we cannot allow it to go unpunished." 

As they had the year before, the opposition-party members of the town council made accusations. 
"We intend to look into the political responsibility of the mayor; he has colluded with private 
enterprise in order to sell the townspeople a bill of goods on the solution of the elephant problem." 

One "worried-looking" mother, thirty-seven, was interviewed by the paper. "Now F m afraid to let 
my children out to play," she said. 

The coverage included a detailed summary of the steps leading to the town's decision to adopt the 
elephant, an aerial sketch of the elephant house and grounds, and brief histories of both the elephant 
and the keeper who had vanished with it. The man, Noboru Watanabe, sixty-three, was from 
Tateyama, in Chiba Prefecture. He had worked for many years as a keeper in the mammalian section 
of the zoo, and "had the complete trust of the zoo authorities, both for his abundant knowledge of these 
animals and for his warm sincere personality." The elephant had been sent from East Africa twenty- 
two years earlier, but little was known about its exact age or its "personality." The report concluded 
with a request from the police for citizens of the town to come forward with any information they 
might have regarding the elephant. 

I thought about this request for a while as I drank my second cup of coffee, but I decided not to call 
the police — both because I preferred not to come into contact with them if I could help it and because 
I felt the police would not believe what I had to tell them. What good would it do to talk to people 
like that, who would not even consider the possibility that the elephant had simply vanished? 

I took my scrapbook down from the shelf, cut out the elephant article, and pasted it in. Then I 
washed the dishes and left for the office. 

I watched the search on the seven-o'clock news. There were hunters carrying large-bore rifles 
loaded with tranquilizer darts, Self-Defense Force troops, policemen, and firemen combing every 
square inch of the woods and hills in the immediate area as helicopters hovered overhead. Of course, 
we're talking about the kind of "woods" and "hills" you fmd in the suburbs outside Tokyo, so they 
didn't have an enormous area to cover. With that many people involved, a day should have been more 
than enough to do the job. And they weren't searching for some tiny homicidal maniac: They were 
after a huge African elephant. There was a limit to the number of places a thing like that could hide. 
But still they had not managed to find it. The chief of police appeared on the screen, saying, "We 
intend to continue the search." And the anchorman concluded the report, "Who released the elephant, 
and how? Where have they hidden it? What was their motive? Everything remains shrouded in 
mystery." 

The search went on for several days, but the authorities were unable to discover a single clue to the 
elephant's whereabouts. I studied the newspaper reports, clipped them all, and pasted them in my 
scrapbook — including editorial cartoons on the subject. The album filled up quickly, and I had to buy 



another. Despite their enormous volume, the clippings contained not one fact of the kind that I was 

looking for. The reports were either pointless or off the mark: ELEPHANT STILL MISSING, GLOOM THICK IN SEARCH HQ, MOB BEHIND 
DISAPPEARANCE? Alld even articles like this became noticeably scarcer after a week had gone by, until there 
was virtually nothing. A few of the weekly magazines carried sensational stories — one even hired a 
psychic — but they had nothing to substantiate their wild headlines. It seemed that people were 
beginning to shove the elephant case into the large category of "unsolvable mysteries." The 
disappearance of one old elephant and one old elephant keeper would have no impact on the course 
of society. The earth would continue its monotonous rotations, politicians would continue issuing 
unreliable proclamations, people would continue yawning on their way to the office, children would 
continue studying for their college-entrance exams. Amid the endless surge and ebb of everyday life, 
interest in a missing elephant could not last forever. And so a number of unremarkable months went 
by, like a tired army marching past a window. 

Whenever I had a spare moment, I would visit the house where the elephant no longer lived. A 
thick chain had been wrapped round and round the bars of the yard's iron gate, to keep people out. 
Peering inside, I could see that the elephant-house door had also been chained and locked, as though 
the police were trying to make up for having failed to fmd the elephant by multiplying the layers of 
security on the now-empty elephant house. The area was deserted, the previous crowds having been 
replaced by a flock of pigeons resting on the roof. No one took care of the grounds any longer, and 
thick green summer grass had sprung up there as if it had been waiting for this opportunity. The chain 
coiled around the door of the elephant house reminded me of a huge snake set to guard a ruined palace 
in a thick forest. A few short months without its elephant had given the place an air of doom and 
desolation that hung there like a huge, oppressive rain cloud. 

I methernear the end of September. It had been raining that day from morning to night — the kind of soft, 
monotonous, misty rain that often falls at that time of year, washing away bit by bit the memories of 
summer burned into the earth. Coursing down the gutters, all those memories flowed into the sewers 
and rivers, to be carried to the deep, dark ocean. 

We noticed each other at the party my company threw to launch its new advertising campaign. I 
work for the PR section of a major manufacturer of electrical appliances, and at the time I was in 
charge of publicity for a coordinated line of kitchen equipment, which was scheduled to go on the 
market in time for the autumn-wedding and winter-bonus seasons. My job was to negotiate with 
several women's magazines for tie-in articles — not the kind of work that takes a great deal of 
intelligence, but I had to see to it that the articles they wrote didn't smack of advertising. When 
magazines gave us publicity, we rewarded them by placing ads in their pages. They scratched our 
backs, we scratched theirs. 

As an editor of a magazine for young housewives, she had come to the party for material for one of 
these "articles." I happened to be in charge of showing her around, pointing out the features of the 
colorfiil refrigerators and coffeemakers and microwave ovens and juicers that a famous Italian 
designer had done for us. 

"The most important point is unity," I explained. "Even the most beautifully designed item dies if it 
is out of balance with its surroundings. Unity of design, unity of color, unity of function: This is what 
today's Ht-chin needs above all else. Research tells us that a housewife spends the largest part of her 
day in the kit-chin. The kit-chin is her workplace, her study, her living room. Which is why she does 
all she can to make the kit-chin a pleasant place to be. It has nothing to do with size. Whether it's 



large or small, one fundamental principle governs every successful kit-chin, and that principle is 
unity. This is the concept underlying the design of our new series. Look at this cooktop, for 
example...." 

She nodded and scribbled things in a small notebook, but it was obvious that she had little interest 
in the material, nor did I have any personal stake in our new cooktop. Both of us were doing our jobs. 

"You know a lot about kitchens," she said when I fmished. She used the Japanese word, without 
picking up on "kit-chin. " 

"That's what I do for a living," I answered with a professional smile. "Aside from that, though, I 
do like to cook. Nothing fancy, but I cook for myself every day." 

"Still, I wonder if unity is all that necessary for a kitchen." 

"We say 'kit-chin, '" I advised her. "No big deal, but the company wants us to use the English." 

"Oh. Sorry. But still, I wonder. Is unity so important for a kit-chin? What do you think?" 

"My personal opinion? That doesn't come out until I take my necktie off," I said with a grin. "But 
today F 11 make an exception. A kitchen probably does need a few things more than it needs unity. But 
those other elements are things you can't sell. And in this pragmatic world of ours, things you can't 
sell don't count for much." 

"Is the world such a pragmatic place?" 

I took out a cigarette and lit it with my lighter. 

"I don't know — the word just popped out," I said. "But it explains a lot. It makes work easier, too. 
You can play games with it, make up neat expressions: 'essentially pragmatic,' or 'pragmatic in 
essence. ' If you look at things that way, you avoid all kinds of complicated problems." 

"What an interesting view!" 

"Not really. It's what everybody thinks. Oh, by the way, we've got some pretty good champagne. 
Care to have some?" 

"Thanks. I'dloveto." 

As we chatted over champagne, we realized we had several mutual acquaintances. Since our part 
of the business world was not a very big pond, if you tossed in a few pebbles, one or two were bound 
to hit a mutual acquaintance. In addition, she and my kid sister happened to have graduated from the 
same university. With markers like this to follow, our conversation went along smoothly. 

She was unmarried, and so was I. She was twenty-six, and I was thirty-one. She wore contact 
lenses, and I wore glasses. She praised my necktie, and I praised her jacket. We compared rents and 
complained about our jobs and salaries. In other words, we were beginning to like each other. She 
was an attractive woman, and not at all pushy. I stood there talking with her for a full twenty minutes, 
unable to discover a single reason not to think well of her. 

As the party was breaking up, I invited her to join me in the hotel 's cocktail lounge, where we 
settled in to continue our conversation. A soundless rain went on falling outside the lounge 's 
panoramic window, the lights of the city sending blurry messages through the mist. A damp hush held 
sway over the nearly empty cocktail lounge. She ordered a frozen daiquiri and I had a scotch on the 
rocks. 

Sipping our drinks, we carried on the kind of conversation that a man and woman have in a bar 
when they have just met and are beginning to like each other. We talked about our college days, our 



tastes in music, sports, our daily routines. 

Then I told her about the elephant. Exactly how this happened, I can't recall. Maybe we were 
talking about something having to do with animals, and that was the connection. Or maybe, 
unconsciously, I had been looking for someone — a good listener — to whom I could present my own, 
unique view on the elephant's disappearance. Or, then again, it might have been the liquor that got me 
talking. 

In any case, the second the words left my mouth, I knew that I had brought up one of the least 
suitable topics I could have found for this occasion. No, I should never have mentioned the elephant. 
The topic was — what? — too complete, too closed. 

I tried to hurry on to something else, but as luck would have it she was more interested than most in 
the case of the vanishing elephant, and once I admitted that I had seen the elephant many times she 
showered me with questions — what kind of elephant was it, how did I think it had escaped, what did 
it eat, wasn't it a danger to the community, and so forth. 

I told her nothing more than what everybody knew from the news, but she seemed to sense 
constraint in my tone of voice. I had never been good at telling lies. 

As if she had not noticed anything strange about my behavior, she sipped her second daiquiri and 
asked, "Weren't you shocked when the elephant disappeared? It's not the kind of thing that somebody 
could have predicted." 

"No, probably not," I said. I took a pretzel from the mound in the glass dish on our table, snapped it 
in two, and ate half. The waiter replaced our ashtray with an empty one. 

She looked at me expectantly. I took out another cigarette and lit it. I had quit smoking three years 
earlier but had begun again when the elephant disappeared. 

"Why 'probably not'? You mean you could have predicted it?" 

"No, of course I couldn't have predicted it," I said with a smile. "For an elephant to disappear all 
of a sudden one day — there's no precedent, no need, for such a thing to happen. It doesn't make any 
logical sense." 

"But still, your answer was very strange. When I said, 'It's not the kind of thing that somebody 
could have predicted,' you said, 'No, probably not' Most people would have said, 'You' re right,' or 
'Yeah, it's weird,' or something. See what I mean?" 

I sent a vague nod in her direction and raised my hand to call the waiter. A kind of tentative silence 
took hold as I waited for him to bring me my next scotch. 

"F m fmding this a little hard to grasp," she said softly. "You were carrying on a perfectly normal 
conversation with me until a couple of minutes ago — at least until the subject of the elephant came up. 
Then something funny happened. I can't understand you anymore. Something's wrong. Is it the 
elephant? Or are my ears playing tricks on me?" 

"There's nothing wrong with your ears," I said. 

"So then it's you. The problem' s with you." 

I stuck my finger in my glass and stirred the ice. I like the sound of ice in a whiskey glass. 

"I wouldn't call it a 'problem,' exactly. It's not that big a deal. Fm not hiding anything. Fm just not 
sure I can talk about it very well, so Fm trying not to say anything at all. But you' re right — it's very 
strange." 



"What do you mean?" 

It was no use: I'd have to tell her the story. I took one gulp of whiskey and started. 

"The thing is, I was probably the last one to see the elephant before it disappeared. I saw it after 
seven o'clock on the evening of May seventeenth, and they noticed it was gone on the afternoon of the 
eighteenth. Nobody saw it in between because they lock the elephant house at six." 

"I don't get it. If they closed the house at six, how did you see it after seven?" 

"There's a kind of clifTbehind the elephant house. A steep hill on private property, with no real 
roads. There's one spot, on the back of the hill, where you can see into the elephant house. I'm 
probably the only one who knows about it." 

I had found the spot purely by chance. Strolling through the area one Sunday afternoon, I had lost 
my way and come out at the top of the clifT. I found a little flat open patch, just big enough for a person 
to stretch out in, and when I looked down through the bushes, there was the elephant-house roof. 
Below the edge of the roof was a fairly large vent opening, and through it I had a clear view of the 
inside of the elephant house. 

I made it a habit after that to visit the place every now and then to look at the elephant when it was 
inside the house. If anyone had asked me why I bothered doing such a thing, I wouldn't have had a 
decent answer. I simply enjoyed watching the elephant during its private time. There was nothing 
more to it than that. I couldn't see the elephant when the house was dark inside, of course, but in the 
early hours of the evening the keeper would have the lights on the whole time he was taking care of 
the elephant, which enabled me to study the scene in detail. 

What struck me immediately when I saw the elephant and keeper alone together was the obvious 
liking they had for each other — some thing they never displayed when they were out before the public. 
Their affection was evident in every gesture. It almost seemed as if they stored away their emotions 
during the day, taking care not to let anyone notice them, and took them out at night when they could be 
alone. Which is not to say that they did anything different when they were by themselves inside. The 
elephant just stood there, as blank as ever, and the keeper would perform those tasks one would 
normally expect him to do as a keeper: scrubbing down the elephant with a deck broom, picking up 
the elephant's enormous droppings, cleaning up after the elephant ate. But there was no way to 
mistake the special warmth, the sense of trust, between them. While the keeper swept the floor, the 
elephant would wave its trunk and pat the keeper' s back. I liked to watch the elephant doing that. 

"Have you always been fond of elephants?" she asked. 'T mean, not just that particular elephant?" 

"Hmm ... come to think of it, I do like elephants," I said. "There's something about them that 
excites me. I guess I've always liked them I wonder why." 

"And that day, too, after the sun went down, I suppose you were up on the hill by yourself, looking 
at the elephant. May — what day was it?" 

"The seventeenth. May seventeenth at seven p m. The days were already very long by then, and the 
sky had a reddish glow, but the lights were on in the elephant house." 

"And was there anything unusual about the elephant or the keeper?" 

"Well, there was and there wasn't. I can't say exactly. It's not as if they were standing right in front 
of me. I'm probably not the most reliable witness." 

"What did happen, exactly?" 



I took a swallow of my now somewhat watery scotch. The rain outside the windows was still 
coming down, no stronger or weaker than before, a static element in a landscape that would never 
change. 

"Nothing happened, really. The elephant and the keeper were doing what they always did — 
cleaning, eating, playing around with each other in that friendly way of theirs. It wasn't what they did 
that was different. It's the way they looked. Something about the balance between them." 

"The balance?" 

"In size. Of their bodies. The elephant's and the keeper 's. The balance seemed to have changed 
somewhat. I had the feeling that to some extent the difference between them had shrunk." 

She kept her gaze fixed on her daiquiri glass for a time. I could see that the ice had melted and that 
the water was working its way through the cocktail like a tiny ocean current. 

"Meaning that the elephant had gotten smaller?" 

"Or the keeper had gotten bigger. Or both simultaneously." 

"And you didn't tell this to the police?" 

"No, of course not," I said. "Fm sure they wouldn't have believed me. And if I had told them I was 
watching the elephant from the cliff at a time like that, I'd have ended up as their number one 
suspect." 

"Still, are you certain that the balance between them had changed?" 

"Probably. I can only say 'probably' I don't have any proof, and as I keep saying, I was looking at 
them through the air vent. But I had looked at them like that I don't know how many times before, so 
it's hard for me to believe that I could make a mistake about something as basic as the relation of their 
sizes." 

In fact, I had wondered at the time whether my eyes were playing tricks on me. I had tried closing 
and opening them and shaking my head, but the elephant's size remained the same. It defmitely looked 
as if it had shrunk — so much so that at first I thought the town might have got hold of a new, smaller 
elephant. But I hadn't heard anything to that effect, and I would never have missed any news reports 
about elephants. If this was not a new elephant, the only possible conclusion was that the old elephant 
had, for one reason or another, shrunk. As I watched, it became obvious to me that this smaller 
elephant had all the same gestures as the old one. It would stamp happily on the ground with its right 
foot while it was being washed, and with its now somewhat narrower trunk it would pat the keeper on 
the back. 

It was a mysterious sight. Looking through the vent, I had the feeling that a different, chilling kind of 
time was flowing through the elephant house — but nowhere else. And it seemed to me, too, that the 
elephant and the keeper were gladly giving themselves over to this new order that was trying to 
envelop them — or that had already partially succeeded in enveloping them 

Altogether, I was probably watching the scene in the elephant house for less than a half hour. The 
lights went out at seven-thirty — much earlier than usual — and from that point on, everything was 
wrapped in darkness. I waited in my spot, hoping that the lights would go on again, but they never did. 
That was the last I saw of the elephant. 

"So, then, you believe that the elephant kept shrinking until it was small enough to escape through 
the bars, or else that it simply dissolved into nothingness. Is that it?" 



"I don't know," I said. "Ali I' m trying to do is recall what I saw with my own eyes, as accurately 
as possible. F m hardly thinking about what happened after that. The visual image I have is so strong 
that, to be honest, it's practically impossible for me to go beyond it." 

That was all I could say about the elephant's disappearance. And just as I had feared, the story of 
the elephant was too particular, too complete in itself, to work as a topic of conversation between a 
young man and woman who had just met. A silence descended upon us after I had finished my tale. 
What subject could either of us bring up after a story about an elephant that had vanished — a story that 
offered virtually no openings for further discussion? She ran her fmger around the edge of her cocktail 
glass, and I sat there reading and rereading the words stamped on my coaster. I never should have told 
her about the elephant. It was not the kind of story you could tell freely to anyone. 

"When I was a little giri, our cat disappeared," she offered after a long silence. "But still, for a cat 
to disappear and for an elephant to disappear — those are two different stories." 

"Yeah, really. There' s no comparison. Thinkofthe size difference." 

Thirty minutes later, we were saying good-bye outside the hotel. She suddenly remembered that she 
had left her umbrella in the cocktail lounge, so I went up in the elevator and brought it down to her. It 
was a brick-red umbrella with a large handle. 

"Thanks," she said. 

"Good night," I said. 

That was the last time I saw her. We talked once on the phone after that, about some details in her 
tie-in article. While we spoke, I thought seriously about inviting her out for dinner, but I ended up not 
doing it. It just didn't seemto matter one way or the other. 

I felt like this a lot after my experience with the vanishing elephant. I would begin to think I wanted 
to do something, but then I would become incapable of distinguishing between the probable results of 
doing it and of not doing it. I often get the feeling that things around me have lost their proper balance, 
though it could be that my perceptions are playing tricks on me. Some kind of balance inside me has 
broken down since the elephant affair, and maybe that causes external phenomena to strike my eye in a 
strange way. It's probably something in me. 

I continue to sell refrigerators and toaster ovens and coffee-makers in the pragmatic world, based 
on afterimages of memories I retain from that world. The more pragmatic I try to become, the more 
successfully I sell — our campaign has succeeded beyond our most optimistic forecasts — and the more 
people I succeed in selling myself to. That's probably because people are looking for a kind of unity 
in this kit-chin we know as the world. Unity of design. Unity of color. Unity of function. 

The papers print almost nothing about the elephant anymore. People seem to have forgotten that 
their town once owned an elephant. The grass that took over the elephant enclosure has withered now, 
and the area has the feel of winter. 

The elephant and keeper have vanished completely. They will never be coming back. 



— translated by Jay Rubin 



Haruki Murakami was born in Kyoto in 1949 and now lives near Tokyo. His workhas been translated into more than forty languages. The most recent of his many honors is the FranzKafka Prize. 
www.hariikimiirakami.com 



Books by Haruki Murakami 



Fiction 
After Dark 
After the Quake 
Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman 
Dance Dance Dance 
The Elephant Vanishes 
Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World 
Kafka on the Shore 
Norwegian Wood 
South of the Border, West of the Sun 
Sputnik Sweetheart 
A Wild Sheep Chase 
The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle 



Nonfiction 

Underground: The Tokyo Gas Attackand the Japanese Psyche 
What I TalkAbout When I TalkAbout Running 



HARUKI MURAKAMI 



AFTERDARK 

Murakami*; trademarkhumor and psychological insight are here distilled with an extraordinary, harmonious mastery. Combining the pyrotechnical genius that made Kafka on the Shore and The Wind-up Bird Chronicle 
international bestsellers, with a moving infusion of heart, Murakami has produced one of his most enchanting fietions yet. 

Fiction/978-0307-27873-9 
AFTERTHE QUAKE 

Set at the time of the 1995 Kobe earthquake, Murakami's characters emanate from a place where the human meets in the inhuman. An electronics salesman who has been abruptly deserted by his wife agrees to deliver 
an enigmatic package — and is rewarded with a glimpse of his true nature. A nian who has been raised to view himsetf as the son of God pursues a stranger who may or not be his human father. A collection agent 
receives a visit from a giant talking frog who enlists his help in saving Tokyo from destruction. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-375-71327-9 
BLIND WILLOW, SLEEPING WOMAN 

This superb collection of stories generously express Murakami's mastery of the form. Here are animated crows, a criminal monkey, and an ice man, as well as the dreams that shape us and the things we might wish for. 
Whether during a chance reunion in Italy, a romantic exile in Greece, or in the grip of everyday life, Murakami*; characters confront grievous loss, or sexuality, or the glow of a firefly, or the impossible distances 
between those who ought to be closest of all. 

Ficdon/Short Storie s/978-1-4000-9608-4 
DANCE DANCE DANCE 

As he searches for a mysteriously vanished girlfriend, Murakami*; protagonis! plunges into a wind tunnel of sexual violence and metaphysical dread in which he collides with call girls, plays chaperone to a lovely 
teenage psychic, and receives cryptic instructions from a shabby butoracular Sheep Man. 

Fictiori/Literature/978-0-679-75379-7 
THE ELEPHANT VANISHES 

With his genius for dislocation, Murakami makes this collection of stories a determined assault on the normal. A man sees his favorite elephant vanish into thin air; a newly wed couple suffers attacks of hunger that drive 
them to hold up a McDonald's in the middle of the night; a young woman discovers that she has become irresistible to a little green monster who burrows up through her backyard. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-75053-6 

HARD-BOILED WONDERLAND AND THE END OF THE WORLD 

Japan*; most popular fiction writer hurtles into the consciousness of the West. Murakami draws readers into a narrative particle accelerator in which a split-brained data processor, a deranged scientist, his undemure 
granddaughter, Bob Dylan, and various thugs, librarians, and subterranean monsters collide to dazzling effect. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-74346-0 
KAFKA ON THE SHORE 

This bookis powered by two remarkable characters: a teenage boy, Kafka Tamura, who runs away from home — either to escape a gruesome oedipal prophecy or to search for his long-missing mother and sister — and 
an aging simpleton called Nakata, who never recovered from a wartime affliction and now is drawn toward Kafka for reasons that he cannot fathom. As their paths converge, Murakami enfolds readers in a world where 
cats talk, fish fail from the sky, and spirits slip out of their bodies to make love or commit murder. 

Fiction/Literature/978-1-4000-7927-8 
NORWEGIAN WOOD 

Toru, a college student in Tokyo, is devoted to Naoko, a beautiful and introspective young woman. But their relationship is colored by the tragic death of their mutual best friend years before. As she retreats further into 
her own world, Toru finds himself drawn to a fiercely independent and sexually liberated young woman. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-375-70402-4 
SOUTH OF THE BORDER, WEST OF THE SUN 

Born into an affluent family, Hajime has arrived at middle age wanting for almost nothing. The postwar years have brought him a fine marriage, two daughters, and an enviable career. Yet a sense of inau-thenticity 
about his success threatens his happiness. And a boyhood memory of a wise, lonely giri named Shimamoto clouds his heart. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-76739-8 
SPUTNIK SWEETHEART 

A college student, identified only as "K," falls in love with his classmate, Sumire. But devotion to the writerly life precludes her from any personal commitments— until she meets Miu, an older and more sophisticated 
businesswoman. When Sumire disappears from an island off the coast of Greece, "K" is solicited to join the search party and finds himself beset by ominous, haunting visions. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-375-72605-7 
UNDERGROUND 

It was a clear spring day, Monday, March 20, 1995, when five members of the religious cult Aum Shinrikyo conducted chemical warfare on the Tokyo subway system using sarin, a poison gas twenty-six times as 
deadly as cyanide. The unthinkable had happened, a major urban transit system had become the target of a terrorist attack In an attemp to discover why, Murakami talked to the people who lived through the catastrophe 
— from a Subway Authority employee with survivor guilt, to a fashion salesman with more venom for the media than for the perpetrators, to a young cult member who vehemently condemns the attackthough he has 
not quit Aum. Through these and many other voices, Murakami exposes intriguing aspects of the Japanese psyche. 

Fiction/978-0-375-72580-7 

WHAT I TALK ABOUT WHEN I TALK ABOUT RUNNING 

While training for the New York City Marathon, Haruki Murakami decided to keep a journal of his progress. The result is a beautiful memoir about his intertwined obsessions with running and writing, fuli of vivid 
memories and insights, including the eureka moment when he decided to become a writer. By turns funny and sobering, playful and philosophical, What I Talk About When 1 Talk About Running is rich and revelatory, 
both for fans of this masterful yet guardedly private writer and for the expanding population who find similar satisfaction in athletic pursuit. 

Memoir/Running/978-0-307-38983- 1 
A WILD SHEEP CHASE 

Atwenty-something advertising executive receives a postcard and appropriates its image for an insurance company 's advertisement. What he doesn't realize is that included in the pastoral scene is a mutant sheep with a 
star on its back, and in using this photo he has unwittingly captured the attention of a man in blackwho offers a menacing ultimatum: find the sheep or face dire conseauences. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-375-71894-6 
THE WIND-UP BIRD CHRONICLE 

The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle is at once a detective story, an account of a disintegrating marriage, and an excavation of the buried secrets of World War II. In a Tokyo suburb a young man named Toru Okada searches 
for his wife 's missing cat. Soon he finds himself looking for his wife as well in a netherworld that lies beneath the placid surface of Tokyo. 

Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-77543-0 



VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL 
Available atyour local bookstore, or visit 
www.randomhouse.com 



FIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, JULY 1994 



Copyright© 1993 by Haruki Murakami 

Ali rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada 
Limited, Toronto. Originally published in hardcover by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, in 1993. 

Some of the stories in this collection originally appeared in the following publicatons: The Magazine (Mobil Corp.): "The Fail of the Roman Empire, the 1881 Indian Uprising, Hitler's Invasion of Poland, and the Realm of the Raging Winds" (in a 
previous translation; translated in this volume by Alfred Birnbaum), The New Yorker: "TV People" and "The Wind-up Bird and Tuesday 's Women" (translated by Alfred Birnbaum), "The Elephant Vanishes" and "Sleep" (translated by Jay 
Rubin), and "Barn Burning" (in a previous translation; translated in this volume by Alfred Birnbaum) Playboy: "The Second Bakery Attack" (translated by Jay Rubin, January 1992). 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Murakami, Haruki, 1949- 

The elephant vanishes / stories by Haruki Murakami; translated 

from the Japanese by Alfred Birnbaum and Jay Rubin.— lst Vintage 

International ed. 
p. cm. 

e ISBN: 978-0-307-76273-3 
L Title. 

PL856.U673E44 1993 93-43493 
895.6'35— dc20 



v3.0 
